\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{nehemuxedas-como-copero-del-rey-artajerjes-en-susa-su-dolor-por-la-desgracia-de-su-pauxeds}{%
\subsection{Nehemías como copero del rey Artajerjes en Susa; su dolor
por la desgracia de su
país}\label{nehemuxedas-como-copero-del-rey-artajerjes-en-susa-su-dolor-por-la-desgracia-de-su-pauxeds}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Las palabras de Nehemías, hijo de Hacalías. En el mes de
Chislev, en el año veinte, estando yo en el palacio de Susa,
\bibleverse{2} vinieron Hanani, uno de mis hermanos, él y algunos
hombres de Judá, y les pregunté sobre los judíos que habían escapado,
que habían quedado del cautiverio, y sobre Jerusalén. \bibleverse{3}
Ellos me dijeron: ``El remanente que queda del cautiverio allí en la
provincia está en gran aflicción y reproche. También el muro de
Jerusalén está derrumbado, y sus puertas están quemadas por el fuego''.
\footnote{\textbf{1:3} 2Cró 36,19}

\bibleverse{4} Cuando oí estas palabras, me senté y lloré, y me lamenté
durante varios días y ayuné y oré ante el Dios del cielo, \footnote{\textbf{1:4}
  Neh 9,1; Esd 9,3}

\hypertarget{la-penitencia-y-la-suxfaplica-de-nehemuxedas}{%
\subsection{La penitencia y la súplica de
Nehemías}\label{la-penitencia-y-la-suxfaplica-de-nehemuxedas}}

\bibleverse{5} y dije: ``Te ruego, Yahvé, el Dios del cielo, el Dios
grande y temible que guarda el pacto y la bondad amorosa con los que lo
aman y guardan sus mandamientos, \footnote{\textbf{1:5} Neh 4,14; Dan
  9,4} \bibleverse{6} que tu oído esté ahora atento y tus ojos abiertos,
para que escuches la oración de tu siervo que hago ante ti en este
momento, de día y de noche, por los hijos de Israel tus siervos,
mientras confieso los pecados de los hijos de Israel que hemos cometido
contra ti. Sí, yo y la casa de mi padre hemos pecado. \bibleverse{7}
Hemos actuado muy corruptamente contra ti, y no hemos guardado los
mandamientos, ni los estatutos, ni las ordenanzas, que ordenaste a tu
siervo Moisés.

\bibleverse{8} ``Acuérdate, te lo ruego, de la palabra que ordenaste a
tu siervo Moisés, diciendo: `Si os desviáis, os dispersaré entre los
pueblos; \bibleverse{9} pero si os volvéis a mí, y guardáis mis
mandamientos y los ponéis en práctica, aunque vuestros desterrados estén
en el extremo de los cielos, yo los recogeré de allí y los traeré al
lugar que he elegido, para hacer habitar allí mi nombre'. \footnote{\textbf{1:9}
  Deut 30,4}

\bibleverse{10} ``Ahora bien, estos son tus siervos y tu pueblo, a
quienes has redimido con tu gran poder y con tu mano fuerte.
\bibleverse{11} Señor, te ruego que tu oído esté atento ahora a la
oración de tu siervo, y a la oración de tus siervos que se deleitan en
temer tu nombre; y por favor, prospera a tu siervo hoy, y concédele
misericordia ante este hombre.'' Ahora yo era portador de la copa del
rey.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{nehemiah-as-cupbearer-to-king-artaxerxes-in-susa-his-sorrow-for-the-misfortune-of-his-country}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah as cupbearer to King Artaxerxes in Susa; his sorrow
for the misfortune of his
country}\label{nehemiah-as-cupbearer-to-king-artaxerxes-in-susa-his-sorrow-for-the-misfortune-of-his-country}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah. Now in the
month Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Susa the palace,
\bibleverse{2} Hanani, one of my brothers, came, he and certain men out
of Judah; and I asked them about the Jews who had escaped, who were left
of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem. \bibleverse{3} They said to
me, ``The remnant who are left of the captivity there in the province
are in great affliction and reproach. The wall of Jerusalem is also
broken down, and its gates are burned with fire.'' \bibleverse{4} When I
heard these words, I sat down and wept, and mourned several days; and I
fasted and prayed before the God\footnote{\textbf{1:4} The Hebrew word
  rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} of heaven,

\hypertarget{nehemiahs-penance-and-supplication}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah's penance and
supplication}\label{nehemiahs-penance-and-supplication}}

\bibleverse{5} and said, ``I beg you, Yahweh,\footnote{\textbf{1:5}
  ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name, sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}''
  (all caps) in other translations.} the God of heaven, the great and
awesome God who keeps covenant and loving kindness with those who love
him and keep his commandments, \bibleverse{6} let your ear now be
attentive and your eyes open, that you may listen to the prayer of your
servant which I pray before you at this time, day and night, for the
children of Israel your servants, while I confess the sins of the
children of Israel which we have sinned against you. Yes, I and my
father's house have sinned. \bibleverse{7} We have dealt very corruptly
against you, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor
the ordinances, which you commanded your servant Moses. \bibleverse{8}
``Remember, I beg you, the word that you commanded your servant Moses,
saying, `If you trespass, I will scatter you among the peoples;
\bibleverse{9} but if you return to me, and keep my commandments and do
them, though your outcasts were in the uttermost part of the heavens,
yet I will gather them from there, and will bring them to the place that
I have chosen, to cause my name to dwell there.' \bibleverse{10} ``Now
these are your servants and your people, whom you have redeemed by your
great power and by your strong hand. \bibleverse{11} Lord,\footnote{\textbf{1:11}
  The word translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} I beg you, let your ear
be attentive now to the prayer of your servant, and to the prayer of
your servants who delight to fear your name; and please prosper your
servant today, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man.'' Now I was
cup bearer to the king.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{nehemuxedas-recibe-permiso-y-autoridad-del-rey-persa-artajerjes-para-restaurar-jerusaluxe9n}{%
\subsection{Nehemías recibe permiso y autoridad del rey persa Artajerjes
para restaurar
Jerusalén}\label{nehemuxedas-recibe-permiso-y-autoridad-del-rey-persa-artajerjes-para-restaurar-jerusaluxe9n}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} En el mes de Nisán, en el vigésimo año del rey
Artajerjes, cuando el vino estaba delante de él, recogí el vino y se lo
di al rey. Nunca antes había estado triste en su presencia.
\bibleverse{2} El rey me dijo: ``¿Por qué tienes el rostro triste, ya
que no estás enfermo? Esto no es más que tristeza de corazón''. Entonces
tuve mucho miedo. \bibleverse{3} Le dije al rey: ``¡Que el rey viva para
siempre! ¿Por qué no ha de estar triste mi rostro, cuando la ciudad, el
lugar de las tumbas de mis padres, yace desolada, y sus puertas han sido
consumidas por el fuego?''

\bibleverse{4} Entonces el rey me dijo: ``¿Cuál es tu petición?''
Entonces oré al Dios del cielo. \bibleverse{5} Dije al rey: ``Si al rey
le parece bien, y si tu siervo ha hallado gracia ante tus ojos, te pido
que me envíes a Judá, a la ciudad de las tumbas de mis padres, para que
la construya.''

\bibleverse{6} El rey me dijo (la reina también estaba sentada junto a
él): ``¿Cuánto durará tu viaje? ¿Cuándo volverás?'' Así pues, el rey
tuvo a bien enviarme, y yo le fijé un plazo. \bibleverse{7} Además, dije
al rey: ``Si al rey le parece bien, que se me den cartas a los
gobernadores del otro lado del río, para que me dejen pasar hasta que
llegue a Judá; \bibleverse{8} y una carta a Asaf, guardián del bosque
del rey, para que me dé madera para hacer vigas para las puertas de la
ciudadela junto al templo, para el muro de la ciudad y para la casa que
voy a ocupar.'' El rey accedió a mis peticiones, por la buena mano de mi
Dios sobre mí. \bibleverse{9} Entonces llegué a los gobernadores del
otro lado del río y les entregué las cartas del rey. El rey había
enviado conmigo a los capitanes del ejército y a los jinetes.
\bibleverse{10} Cuando Sanbalat, el horonita, y Tobías, el siervo
amonita, se enteraron de esto, se entristecieron mucho, porque un hombre
había venido a buscar el bienestar de los hijos de Israel.

\hypertarget{el-recorrido-nocturno-de-nehemuxedas-por-las-murallas-de-la-ciudad-su-llamado-a-los-camaradas-nacionales-para-restaurar-el-muro}{%
\subsection{El recorrido nocturno de Nehemías por las murallas de la
ciudad; su llamado a los camaradas nacionales para restaurar el
muro}\label{el-recorrido-nocturno-de-nehemuxedas-por-las-murallas-de-la-ciudad-su-llamado-a-los-camaradas-nacionales-para-restaurar-el-muro}}

\bibleverse{11} Llegué, pues, a Jerusalén y estuve allí tres días.
\bibleverse{12} Me levanté de noche, yo y algunos hombres conmigo. No
dije a nadie lo que mi Dios puso en mi corazón para hacer por Jerusalén.
No me acompañaba ningún animal, excepto el que yo montaba.
\bibleverse{13} Salí de noche por la puerta del valle hacia el pozo del
chacal, y luego hacia la puerta del estiércol; e inspeccioné los muros
de Jerusalén, que estaban derrumbados, y sus puertas consumidas por el
fuego. \bibleverse{14} Luego seguí hasta la puerta del manantial y hasta
el estanque del rey, pero no había lugar para que pasara el animal que
estaba debajo de mí. \footnote{\textbf{2:14} Neh 3,15} \bibleverse{15}
Luego subí de noche por el arroyo e inspeccioné la muralla; me volví y
entré por la puerta del valle, y así regresé. \bibleverse{16} Los jefes
no sabían adónde había ido ni lo que había hecho. Todavía no lo había
contado a los judíos, ni a los sacerdotes, ni a los nobles, ni a los
gobernantes, ni a los demás que hacían la obra.

\bibleverse{17} Entonces les dije: ``Vosotros veis la mala situación en
que nos encontramos, cómo Jerusalén yace desolada y sus puertas están
quemadas por el fuego. Vengan, construyamos el muro de Jerusalén, para
que no seamos deshonrados''.

\hypertarget{compromiso-del-jefe-de-comunidad-el-riduxedculo-de-los-tres-oponentes-paganos-rechazados-por-nehemuxedas}{%
\subsection{Compromiso del jefe de comunidad; el ridículo de los tres
oponentes paganos rechazados por
Nehemías}\label{compromiso-del-jefe-de-comunidad-el-riduxedculo-de-los-tres-oponentes-paganos-rechazados-por-nehemuxedas}}

\bibleverse{18} Les hablé de la mano de mi Dios, que era buena conmigo,
y también de las palabras del rey que me había dicho. Dijeron:
``Levantémonos y construyamos''. Así que fortalecieron sus manos para la
buena obra.

\bibleverse{19} Pero cuando lo oyeron Sanbalat el horonita, Tobías el
siervo amonita y Gesem el árabe, se burlaron de nosotros y nos
despreciaron, y dijeron: ``¿Qué es esto que estáis haciendo? ¿Os vais a
rebelar contra el rey?''

\bibleverse{20} Entonces les respondí y les dije: ``El Dios del cielo
nos prosperará. Por eso nosotros, sus siervos, nos levantaremos y
construiremos; pero vosotros no tenéis parte, ni derecho, ni memoria en
Jerusalén.'' \footnote{\textbf{2:20} Efes 2,12}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{nehemiah-receives-permission-and-authority-from-persian-king-artaxerxes-to-restore-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah receives permission and authority from Persian King
Artaxerxes to restore
Jerusalem}\label{nehemiah-receives-permission-and-authority-from-persian-king-artaxerxes-to-restore-jerusalem}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} In the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
the king, when wine was before him, I picked up the wine, and gave it to
the king. Now I had not been sad before in his presence. \bibleverse{2}
The king said to me, ``Why is your face sad, since you are not sick?
This is nothing else but sorrow of heart.'' Then I was very much afraid.
\bibleverse{3} I said to the king, ``Let the king live forever! Why
shouldn't my face be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' tombs,
lies waste, and its gates have been consumed with fire?'' \bibleverse{4}
Then the king said to me, ``What is your request?'' So I prayed to the
God of heaven. \bibleverse{5} I said to the king, ``If it pleases the
king, and if your servant has found favor in your sight, I ask that you
would send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers' tombs, that I may
build it.'' \bibleverse{6} The king said to me (the queen was also
sitting by him), ``How long will your journey be? When will you
return?'' So it pleased the king to send me, and I set a time for him.
\bibleverse{7} Moreover I said to the king, ``If it pleases the king,
let letters be given me to the governors beyond the River, that they may
let me pass through until I come to Judah; \bibleverse{8} and a letter
to Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, that he may give me timber to
make beams for the gates of the citadel by the temple, for the wall of
the city, and for the house that I will occupy.'' The king granted my
requests, because of the good hand of my God on me. \bibleverse{9} Then
I came to the governors beyond the River, and gave them the king's
letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and horsemen with
me. \bibleverse{10} When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite
servant heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, because a man had come
to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.

\hypertarget{nehemiahs-night-tour-of-the-city-walls-his-call-to-the-national-comrades-to-restore-the-wall}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah's night tour of the city walls; his call to the
national comrades to restore the
wall}\label{nehemiahs-night-tour-of-the-city-walls-his-call-to-the-national-comrades-to-restore-the-wall}}

\bibleverse{11} So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.
\bibleverse{12} I arose in the night, I and a few men with me. I didn't
tell anyone what my God put into my heart to do for Jerusalem. There
wasn't any animal with me except the animal that I rode on.
\bibleverse{13} I went out by night by the valley gate toward the
jackal's well, then to the dung gate; and I inspected the walls of
Jerusalem, which were broken down, and its gates were consumed with
fire. \bibleverse{14} Then I went on to the spring gate and to the
king's pool, but there was no place for the animal that was under me to
pass. \bibleverse{15} Then I went up in the night by the brook and
inspected the wall; and I turned back, and entered by the valley gate,
and so returned. \bibleverse{16} The rulers didn't know where I went, or
what I did. I had not as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests,
nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest who did the work.
\bibleverse{17} Then I said to them, ``You see the bad situation that we
are in, how Jerusalem lies waste, and its gates are burned with fire.
Come, let's build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we won't be
disgraced.''

\hypertarget{commitment-of-the-head-of-community-the-ridicule-of-the-three-pagan-opponents-rejected-by-nehemiah}{%
\subsection{Commitment of the head of community; the ridicule of the
three pagan opponents rejected by
Nehemiah}\label{commitment-of-the-head-of-community-the-ridicule-of-the-three-pagan-opponents-rejected-by-nehemiah}}

\bibleverse{18} I told them about the hand of my God which was good on
me, and also about the king's words that he had spoken to me. They said,
``Let's rise up and build.'' So they strengthened their hands for the
good work. \bibleverse{19} But when Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the
Ammonite servant, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they ridiculed us
and despised us, and said, ``What is this thing that you are doing? Will
you rebel against the king?'' \bibleverse{20} Then I answered them, and
said to them, ``The God of heaven will prosper us. Therefore we, his
servants, will arise and build; but you have no portion, nor right, nor
memorial in Jerusalem.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{construcciuxf3n-pieza-a-pieza-del-muro-lista-de-los-involucrados-en-la-construcciuxf3n-del-muro}{%
\subsection{Construcción pieza a pieza del muro; Lista de los
involucrados en la construcción del
muro}\label{construcciuxf3n-pieza-a-pieza-del-muro-lista-de-los-involucrados-en-la-construcciuxf3n-del-muro}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces el sumo sacerdote Eliasib se levantó con sus
hermanos sacerdotes, y construyeron la puerta de las ovejas. La
santificaron y levantaron sus puertas. La santificaron hasta la torre de
Hammeah, hasta la torre de Hananel. \bibleverse{2} Junto a él edificaron
los hombres de Jericó. Junto a ellos edificó Zaccur, hijo de Imri.

\bibleverse{3} Los hijos de Hassenaah construyeron la puerta del
pescado. Colocaron sus vigas, y colocaron sus puertas, sus cerrojos y
sus barras. \bibleverse{4} Junto a ellos, Meremot, hijo de Urías, hijo
de Hakkoz, hizo las reparaciones. Junto a ellos, Mesulam hijo de
Berequías, hijo de Meshezabel, hizo reparaciones. Junto a ellos, Sadoc
hijo de Baana hizo reparaciones. \bibleverse{5} Junto a ellos, los
tecoítas hacían reparaciones; pero sus nobles no ponían el cuello en la
obra del Señor.

\bibleverse{6} Joiada, hijo de Paseah, y Meshullam, hijo de Besodeiah,
repararon la vieja puerta. Colocaron sus vigas y levantaron sus puertas,
sus cerrojos y sus barras. \bibleverse{7} Junto a ellos, Melatiá el
gabaonita y Jadón el meronita, hombres de Gabaón y de Mizpa, repararon
la residencia del gobernador al otro lado del río. \bibleverse{8} Junto
a él, Uziel hijo de Harhaiah, orfebres, hizo reparaciones. Junto a él,
Hananías, uno de los perfumistas, hizo reparaciones, y fortificaron
Jerusalén hasta el ancho muro. \bibleverse{9} Junto a ellos, Refaías
hijo de Hur, jefe de la mitad del distrito de Jerusalén, hizo
reparaciones. \bibleverse{10} Junto a ellos, Jedaías hijo de Harumaf
hizo reparaciones frente a su casa. Junto a él, Hattush hijo de
Hasabneías hizo reparaciones. \bibleverse{11} Malquías hijo de Harim y
Hasub hijo de Pahatmoab repararon otra parte y la torre de los hornos.
\bibleverse{12} Junto a él, Salum hijo de Hallohesh, jefe de la mitad
del distrito de Jerusalén, él y sus hijas hicieron reparaciones.

\bibleverse{13} Hanun y los habitantes de Zanoa repararon la puerta del
valle. La construyeron y colocaron sus puertas, sus cerrojos y sus
barras, y mil codos de la muralla hasta la puerta del estiércol.

\bibleverse{14} Malquías, hijo de Recab, jefe del distrito de Bet
Haccherem, reparó la puerta del estiércol. La construyó y colocó sus
puertas, sus cerrojos y sus barras.

\bibleverse{15} Salún hijo de Colhoze, jefe del distrito de Mizpa,
reparó la puerta del manantial. La edificó, la cubrió y levantó sus
puertas, sus cerrojos y sus rejas; y reparó el muro del estanque de
Sela, junto al jardín del rey, hasta la escalera que baja de la ciudad
de David. \footnote{\textbf{3:15} Juan 9,7} \bibleverse{16} Después de
él, Nehemías hijo de Azbuk, jefe de la mitad del distrito de Bet Zur,
hizo reparaciones en el lugar frente a las tumbas de David, en el
estanque que se hizo y en la casa de los valientes. \bibleverse{17}
Después de él, los levitas-Rehum, hijo de Bani, hicieron reparaciones.
Después de él, Hasabías, jefe de la mitad del distrito de Keila, hizo
reparaciones en su distrito. \bibleverse{18} Después de él, sus
hermanos, Bavvai hijo de Henadad, gobernante de la mitad del distrito de
Keila, hizo reparaciones. \bibleverse{19} Después de él, Ezer hijo de
Jesúa, gobernante de Mizpa, reparó otra porción al otro lado de la
subida a la armería, en el recodo de la muralla. \bibleverse{20} Después
de él, Baruc hijo de Zabbai reparó con empeño otra parte, desde la
vuelta de la muralla hasta la puerta de la casa del sumo sacerdote
Eliasib. \footnote{\textbf{3:20} Neh 3,1} \bibleverse{21} Después de él,
Meremot, hijo de Urías, hijo de Hakkoz, reparó otra parte, desde la
puerta de la casa de Eliasib hasta el final de la casa de Eliashib.
\footnote{\textbf{3:21} Esd 8,33} \bibleverse{22} Después de él, los
sacerdotes, los hombres de los alrededores hicieron las reparaciones.
\bibleverse{23} Después de ellos, Benjamín y Jasub hicieron reparaciones
al otro lado de su casa. Después de ellos, Azarías, hijo de Maasías,
hijo de Ananías, hizo reparaciones junto a su propia casa.
\bibleverse{24} Después de él, Binnui hijo de Henadad reparó otra parte,
desde la casa de Azarías hasta la vuelta del muro y hasta la esquina.
\bibleverse{25} Palal hijo de Uzai reparó frente a la curva del muro y
la torre que sobresale de la casa superior del rey, que está junto al
patio de la guardia. Después de él, Pedaías, hijo de Paros, hizo las
reparaciones. \footnote{\textbf{3:25} Jer 32,2; Jer 33,1}
\bibleverse{26} (Los servidores del templo vivían en Ofel, en el lugar
que está frente a la puerta de las aguas, hacia el oriente, y en la
torre que sobresale). \bibleverse{27} Después de él, los tecoítas
repararon otra parte, frente a la gran torre que sobresale, y hasta el
muro de Ofel.

\bibleverse{28} Encima de la puerta de los caballos, los sacerdotes
hacían reparaciones, cada uno frente a su propia casa. \footnote{\textbf{3:28}
  2Re 11,16} \bibleverse{29} Después de ellos, Sadoc hijo de Immer hacía
las reparaciones frente a su propia casa. Después de él, Semaías hijo de
Secanías, guardián de la puerta oriental, hizo reparaciones.
\bibleverse{30} Después de él, Hananías hijo de Selemías y Hanún, sexto
hijo de Zalaf, repararon otra parte. Después de él, Mesulam hijo de
Berequías hizo reparaciones frente a su habitación. \bibleverse{31}
Después de él, Malquías, uno de los orfebres de la casa de los
servidores del templo, y de los mercaderes, hizo reparaciones frente a
la puerta de Hamifcad y a la subida de la esquina. \bibleverse{32} Entre
la subida de la esquina y la puerta de las ovejas, los orfebres y los
mercaderes hicieron reparaciones.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{construction-piece-by-piece-of-the-wall-list-of-those-involved-in-the-construction-of-the-wall}{%
\subsection{Construction piece by piece of the wall; List of those
involved in the construction of the
wall}\label{construction-piece-by-piece-of-the-wall-list-of-those-involved-in-the-construction-of-the-wall}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brothers
the priests, and they built the sheep gate. They sanctified it, and set
up its doors. They sanctified it even to the tower of Hammeah, to the
tower of Hananel. \bibleverse{2} Next to him the men of Jericho built.
Next to them Zaccur the son of Imri built. \bibleverse{3} The sons of
Hassenaah built the fish gate. They laid its beams, and set up its
doors, its bolts, and its bars. \bibleverse{4} Next to them, Meremoth
the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz made repairs. Next to them,
Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel made repairs. Next
to them, Zadok the son of Baana made repairs. \bibleverse{5} Next to
them, the Tekoites made repairs; but their nobles didn't put their necks
to the Lord's work. \bibleverse{6} Joiada the son of Paseah and
Meshullam the son of Besodeiah repaired the old gate. They laid its
beams and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars. \bibleverse{7} Next
to them, Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of
Gibeon and of Mizpah, repaired the residence of the governor beyond the
River. \bibleverse{8} Next to him, Uzziel the son of Harhaiah,
goldsmiths, made repairs. Next to him, Hananiah, one of the perfumers,
made repairs, and they fortified Jerusalem even to the wide wall.
\bibleverse{9} Next to them, Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of half
the district of Jerusalem, made repairs. \bibleverse{10} Next to them,
Jedaiah the son of Harumaph made repairs across from his house. Next to
him, Hattush the son of Hashabneiah made repairs. \bibleverse{11}
Malchijah the son of Harim and Hasshub the son of Pahathmoab repaired
another portion and the tower of the furnaces. \bibleverse{12} Next to
him, Shallum the son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of
Jerusalem, he and his daughters made repairs. \bibleverse{13} Hanun and
the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired the valley gate. They built it, and
set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and one thousand
cubits\footnote{\textbf{3:13} A cubit is the length from the tip of the
  middle finger to the elbow on a man's arm, or about 18 inches or 46
  centimeters.} of the wall to the dung gate. \bibleverse{14} Malchijah
the son of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth Haccherem, repaired
the dung gate. He built it, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its
bars. \bibleverse{15} Shallun the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of the
district of Mizpah, repaired the spring gate. He built it, covered it,
and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars; and he repaired the wall
of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden, even to the stairs that go
down from David's city. \bibleverse{16} After him, Nehemiah the son of
Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth Zur, made repairs to the
place opposite the tombs of David, and to the pool that was made, and to
the house of the mighty men. \bibleverse{17} After him, the
Levites---Rehum the son of Bani made repairs. Next to him, Hashabiah,
the ruler of half the district of Keilah, made repairs for his district.
\bibleverse{18} After him, their brothers, Bavvai the son of Henadad,
the ruler of half the district of Keilah made repairs. \bibleverse{19}
Next to him, Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, repaired
another portion across from the ascent to the armory at the turning of
the wall. \bibleverse{20} After him, Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly
repaired another portion, from the turning of the wall to the door of
the house of Eliashib the high priest. \bibleverse{21} After him,
Meremoth the son of Uriah the son of Hakkoz repaired another portion,
from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of
Eliashib. \bibleverse{22} After him, the priests, the men of the
surrounding area made repairs. \bibleverse{23} After them, Benjamin and
Hasshub made repairs across from their house. After them, Azariah the
son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah made repairs beside his own house.
\bibleverse{24} After him, Binnui the son of Henadad repaired another
portion, from the house of Azariah to the turning of the wall, and to
the corner. \bibleverse{25} Palal the son of Uzai made repairs opposite
the turning of the wall, and the tower that stands out from the upper
house of the king, which is by the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah
the son of Parosh made repairs. \bibleverse{26} (Now the temple servants
lived in Ophel, to the place opposite the water gate toward the east,
and the tower that stands out.) \bibleverse{27} After him the Tekoites
repaired another portion, opposite the great tower that stands out, and
to the wall of Ophel. \bibleverse{28} Above the horse gate, the priests
made repairs, everyone across from his own house. \bibleverse{29} After
them, Zadok the son of Immer made repairs across from his own house.
After him, Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate,
made repairs. \bibleverse{30} After him, Hananiah the son of Shelemiah,
and Hanun, the sixth son of Zalaph, repaired another portion. After him,
Meshullam the son of Berechiah made repairs across from his room.
\bibleverse{31} After him, Malchijah, one of the goldsmiths to the house
of the temple servants, and of the merchants, made repairs opposite the
gate of Hammiphkad and to the ascent of the corner. \bibleverse{32}
Between the ascent of the corner and the sheep gate, the goldsmiths and
the merchants made repairs.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{continuaciuxf3n-de-la-construcciuxf3n-del-muro-a-pesar-del-riduxedculo-y-la-hostilidad-de-los-oponentes-paganos}{%
\subsection{Continuación de la construcción del muro a pesar del
ridículo y la hostilidad de los oponentes
paganos}\label{continuaciuxf3n-de-la-construcciuxf3n-del-muro-a-pesar-del-riduxedculo-y-la-hostilidad-de-los-oponentes-paganos}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} Pero cuando Sanbalat se enteró de que estábamos
construyendo el muro, se enojó y se indignó mucho, y se burló de los
judíos. \footnote{\textbf{4:1} Neh 2,19} \bibleverse{2} Habló ante sus
hermanos y el ejército de Samaria y dijo: ``¿Qué hacen estos débiles
judíos? ¿Se van a fortificar? ¿Sacrificarán? ¿Acabarán en un día?
¿Revivirán las piedras de los montones de basura, ya que están
quemadas?''

\bibleverse{3} Junto a él estaba Tobías, el amonita, quien dijo: ``Lo
que están construyendo, si una zorra trepara por él, derribaría su muro
de piedra.''

\bibleverse{4} ``Escucha, Dios nuestro, porque somos despreciados.
Vuelve su reproche sobre su propia cabeza. Entrégalos como botín en
tierra de cautiverio. \footnote{\textbf{4:4} Sal 7,16} \bibleverse{5} No
cubras su iniquidad. No permitas que su pecado sea borrado ante ti;
porque han insultado a los constructores.''

\bibleverse{6} Construimos, pues, el muro, y toda la muralla se unió
hasta la mitad de su altura, porque el pueblo tenía ganas de trabajar.

\hypertarget{nuevos-ataques-de-los-oponentes-al-edificio-las-medidas-exitosas-de-nehemia-en-su-contra}{%
\subsection{Nuevos ataques de los oponentes al edificio; Las medidas
exitosas de Nehemia en su
contra}\label{nuevos-ataques-de-los-oponentes-al-edificio-las-medidas-exitosas-de-nehemia-en-su-contra}}

\bibleverse{7} Pero cuando Sanbalat, Tobías, los árabes, los amonitas y
los asdoditas se enteraron de que se había avanzado en la reparación de
los muros de Jerusalén y de que se empezaban a rellenar las brechas, se
enfurecieron mucho; \bibleverse{8} y todos ellos se conjuraron para
venir a pelear contra Jerusalén y causar confusión entre nosotros.
\bibleverse{9} Pero nosotros hicimos nuestra oración a nuestro Dios, y
pusimos guardia contra ellos día y noche a causa de ellos.

\bibleverse{10} Judá dijo: ``La fuerza de los portadores de cargas se
desvanece y hay muchos escombros, de modo que no podemos construir el
muro''. \bibleverse{11} Nuestros adversarios dijeron: ``No lo sabrán ni
lo verán, hasta que entremos en medio de ellos y los matemos, y hagamos
cesar la obra.''

\bibleverse{12} Cuando llegaron los judíos que vivían junto a ellos, nos
dijeron diez veces desde todos los lugares: ``Dondequiera que os
volváis, nos atacarán''.

\bibleverse{13} Por eso puse guardias en las partes más bajas del
espacio detrás de la muralla, en los lugares abiertos. Puse al pueblo
por grupos familiares con sus espadas, sus lanzas y sus arcos.
\bibleverse{14} Miré, me levanté y dije a los nobles, a los gobernantes
y al resto del pueblo: ``¡No tengan miedo de ellos! Acuérdense del
Señor, que es grande y temible, y luchen por sus hermanos, sus hijos,
sus hijas, sus esposas y sus casas''. \footnote{\textbf{4:14} Neh 1,5}

\bibleverse{15} Cuando nuestros enemigos se enteraron de que habíamos
sido informados, y de que Dios había hecho fracasar su consejo, todos
nosotros volvimos al muro, cada uno a su trabajo. \footnote{\textbf{4:15}
  Job 5,12} \bibleverse{16} Desde entonces, la mitad de mis siervos
hacía el trabajo, y la otra mitad tenía las lanzas, los escudos, los
arcos y las cotas de malla; y los jefes estaban detrás de toda la casa
de Judá. \bibleverse{17} Los que construían el muro y los que llevaban
cargas se cargaban; cada uno con una de sus manos hacía el trabajo y con
la otra sostenía su arma. \bibleverse{18} Entre los constructores, todos
llevaban su espada al costado, y así construían. El que tocaba la
trompeta estaba junto a mí. \bibleverse{19} Dije a los nobles, a los
jefes y al resto del pueblo: ``La obra es grande y está muy extendida, y
nosotros estamos separados en el muro, lejos unos de otros.
\bibleverse{20} Dondequiera que oigáis el sonido de la trompeta, reuníos
allí con nosotros. Nuestro Dios luchará por nosotros''.

\bibleverse{21} Así hicimos el trabajo. La mitad del pueblo sostuvo las
lanzas desde el amanecer hasta que aparecieron las estrellas.
\bibleverse{22} Asimismo, al mismo tiempo dije al pueblo: ``Que cada uno
con su siervo se aloje dentro de Jerusalén, para que durante la noche
nos sirvan de guardia y para que trabajen durante el día.''
\bibleverse{23} Así que ni yo, ni mis hermanos, ni mis siervos, ni los
hombres de la guardia que me seguían nos quitamos la ropa. Cada uno
llevó su arma al agua.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{continuation-of-wall-construction-despite-ridicule-and-hostility-from-pagan-opponents}{%
\subsection{Continuation of wall construction despite ridicule and
hostility from pagan
opponents}\label{continuation-of-wall-construction-despite-ridicule-and-hostility-from-pagan-opponents}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} But when Sanballat heard that we were building the wall,
he was angry, and was very indignant, and mocked the Jews.
\bibleverse{2} He spoke before his brothers and the army of Samaria, and
said, ``What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they fortify themselves?
Will they sacrifice? Will they finish in a day? Will they revive the
stones out of the heaps of rubbish, since they are burned?''
\bibleverse{3} Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, ``What
they are building, if a fox climbed up it, he would break down their
stone wall.'' \bibleverse{4} ``Hear, our God, for we are despised. Turn
back their reproach on their own head. Give them up for a plunder in a
land of captivity. \bibleverse{5} Don't cover their iniquity. Don't let
their sin be blotted out from before you; for they have insulted the
builders.'' \bibleverse{6} So we built the wall; and all the wall was
joined together to half its height, for the people had a mind to work.

\hypertarget{new-attacks-by-opponents-on-the-building-nehemias-successful-measures-against-him}{%
\subsection{New attacks by opponents on the building; Nehemia's
successful measures against
him}\label{new-attacks-by-opponents-on-the-building-nehemias-successful-measures-against-him}}

\bibleverse{7} But when Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabians, the Ammonites,
and the Ashdodites heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem
went forward, and that the breaches began to be filled, they were very
angry; \bibleverse{8} and they all conspired together to come and fight
against Jerusalem, and to cause confusion among us. \bibleverse{9} But
we made our prayer to our God, and set a watch against them day and
night because of them. \bibleverse{10} Judah said, ``The strength of the
bearers of burdens is fading and there is much rubble, so that we are
not able to build the wall.'' \bibleverse{11} Our adversaries said,
``They will not know or see, until we come in among them and kill them,
and cause the work to cease.'' \bibleverse{12} When the Jews who lived
by them came, they said to us ten times from all places, ``Wherever you
turn, they will attack us.'' \bibleverse{13} Therefore I set guards in
the lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in the open places. I set
the people by family groups with their swords, their spears, and their
bows. \bibleverse{14} I looked, and rose up, and said to the nobles, to
the rulers, and to the rest of the people, ``Don't be afraid of them!
Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome, and fight for your
brothers, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your houses.''
\bibleverse{15} When our enemies heard that it was known to us, and God
had brought their counsel to nothing, all of us returned to the wall,
everyone to his work. \bibleverse{16} From that time forth, half of my
servants did the work, and half of them held the spears, the shields,
the bows, and the coats of mail; and the rulers were behind all the
house of Judah. \bibleverse{17} Those who built the wall, and those who
bore burdens loaded themselves; everyone with one of his hands did the
work, and with the other held his weapon. \bibleverse{18} Among the
builders, everyone wore his sword at his side, and so built. He who
sounded the trumpet was by me. \bibleverse{19} I said to the nobles, and
to the rulers and to the rest of the people, ``The work is great and
widely spread out, and we are separated on the wall, far from one
another. \bibleverse{20} Wherever you hear the sound of the trumpet,
rally there to us. Our God will fight for us.'' \bibleverse{21} So we
did the work. Half of the people held the spears from the rising of the
morning until the stars appeared. \bibleverse{22} Likewise at the same
time I said to the people, ``Let everyone with his servant lodge within
Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a guard to us, and may labor in
the day.'' \bibleverse{23} So neither I, nor my brothers, nor my
servants, nor the men of the guard who followed me took off our clothes.
Everyone took his weapon to the water.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{alivio-de-la-difuxedcil-situaciuxf3n-de-la-gente-comuxfan-mediante-el-alivio-de-la-deuda-el-gobierno-desinteresado-de-nehemuxedas}{%
\subsection{Alivio de la difícil situación de la gente común mediante el
alivio de la deuda; El gobierno desinteresado de
Nehemías}\label{alivio-de-la-difuxedcil-situaciuxf3n-de-la-gente-comuxfan-mediante-el-alivio-de-la-deuda-el-gobierno-desinteresado-de-nehemuxedas}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces se levantó un gran clamor del pueblo y de sus
mujeres contra sus hermanos los judíos. \bibleverse{2} Porque había
algunos que decían: ``Nosotros, nuestros hijos y nuestras hijas, somos
muchos. Consigamos grano, para comer y vivir''. \bibleverse{3} También
había algunos que decían: ``Estamos hipotecando nuestros campos,
nuestras viñas y nuestras casas. Consigamos grano, a causa del hambre''.
\bibleverse{4} Hubo también algunos que dijeron: ``Hemos pedido dinero
prestado para el tributo del rey usando nuestros campos y nuestras viñas
como garantía. \bibleverse{5} Pero ahora nuestra carne es como la carne
de nuestros hermanos, nuestros hijos como sus hijos. He aquí, traemos a
nuestros hijos y a nuestras hijas a la esclavitud para ser siervos, y
algunas de nuestras hijas han sido traídas a la esclavitud. Tampoco está
en nuestro poder evitarlo, porque otros hombres tienen nuestros campos y
nuestras viñas.''

\hypertarget{eliminaciuxf3n-de-los-males-mediante-las-resoluciones-de-la-asamblea-popular}{%
\subsection{Eliminación de los males mediante las resoluciones de la
asamblea
popular}\label{eliminaciuxf3n-de-los-males-mediante-las-resoluciones-de-la-asamblea-popular}}

\bibleverse{6} Me enojé mucho al oír su clamor y estas palabras.
\bibleverse{7} Entonces consulté conmigo mismo y discutí con los nobles
y los gobernantes, y les dije: ``Ustedes exigen usura, cada uno a su
hermano''. Celebré una gran asamblea contra ellos. \footnote{\textbf{5:7}
  Éxod 22,25} \bibleverse{8} Les dije: ``Nosotros, según nuestra
capacidad, hemos redimido a nuestros hermanos los judíos que fueron
vendidos a las naciones; ¿y vosotros queréis incluso vender a vuestros
hermanos, y que se nos vendan a nosotros?'' Entonces callaron, y no
hallaron palabra que decir. \bibleverse{9} También dije: ``Lo que hacéis
no es bueno. ¿No debéis andar en el temor de nuestro Dios a causa del
oprobio de las naciones, nuestros enemigos? \bibleverse{10} Asimismo,
mis hermanos y mis siervos les prestan dinero y grano. Por favor,
detengamos esta usura. \bibleverse{11} Por favor, devuélveles hoy mismo
sus campos, sus viñedos, sus olivares y sus casas, también la centésima
parte del dinero y del grano, del vino nuevo y del aceite que les estás
cobrando.''

\bibleverse{12} Entonces dijeron: ``Los restauraremos y no les
exigiremos nada. Lo haremos así, como tú dices''. Entonces llamé a los
sacerdotes y les tomé juramento de que cumplirían esta promesa.
\bibleverse{13} También sacudí mi regazo, y dije: ``Así sacuda Dios a
todo hombre de su casa y de su trabajo que no cumpla esta promesa;
incluso que sea sacudido y vaciado así.'' Toda la asamblea dijo:
``Amén'', y alabó a Yahvé. El pueblo cumplió esta promesa.

\hypertarget{el-altruismo-de-nehemuxedas-mientras-estaba-en-el-cargo}{%
\subsection{El altruismo de Nehemías mientras estaba en el
cargo}\label{el-altruismo-de-nehemuxedas-mientras-estaba-en-el-cargo}}

\bibleverse{14} Además, desde que fui designado para ser su gobernador
en la tierra de Judá, desde el año veinte hasta el año treinta y dos del
rey Artajerjes, es decir, doce años, ni yo ni mis hermanos hemos comido
el pan del gobernador. \bibleverse{15} Pero los anteriores gobernadores
que me precedieron eran mantenidos por el pueblo, y tomaban de ellos pan
y vino, más cuarenta siclos de plata; sí, incluso sus siervos gobernaban
al pueblo, pero yo no lo hice, por temor a Dios. \bibleverse{16} Sí, yo
también continué en la obra de este muro. No compramos ninguna tierra.
Todos mis siervos se reunieron allí para la obra. \bibleverse{17}
Además, había en mi mesa, de los judíos y de los gobernantes, ciento
cincuenta hombres, además de los que vinieron a nosotros de entre las
naciones que estaban alrededor. \bibleverse{18} Lo que se preparó para
un día fue un buey y seis ovejas selectas. También se me prepararon aves
de corral, y una vez cada diez días una reserva de toda clase de vino.
Pero por todo esto no exigí la paga del gobernador, porque la esclavitud
era pesada para este pueblo. \bibleverse{19} Acuérdate de mí, Dios mío,
por todo el bien que he hecho a este pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{5:19} Neh
  13,14; Neh 13,22; Neh 13,31}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{relief-from-the-plight-of-ordinary-people-through-debt-relief-nehemiahs-selfless-rule}{%
\subsection{Relief from the plight of ordinary people through debt
relief; Nehemiah's Selfless
Rule}\label{relief-from-the-plight-of-ordinary-people-through-debt-relief-nehemiahs-selfless-rule}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Then there arose a great cry of the people and of their
wives against their brothers the Jews. \bibleverse{2} For there were
some who said, ``We, our sons and our daughters, are many. Let us get
grain, that we may eat and live.'' \bibleverse{3} There were also some
who said, ``We are mortgaging our fields, our vineyards, and our houses.
Let us get grain, because of the famine.'' \bibleverse{4} There were
also some who said, ``We have borrowed money for the king's tribute
using our fields and our vineyards as collateral. \bibleverse{5} Yet now
our flesh is as the flesh of our brothers, our children as their
children. Behold,\footnote{\textbf{5:5} ``Behold'', from
  ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze
  at. It is often used as an interjection.} we bring our sons and our
daughters into bondage to be servants, and some of our daughters have
been brought into bondage. It is also not in our power to help it,
because other men have our fields and our vineyards.''

\hypertarget{elimination-of-evils-through-the-resolutions-of-the-popular-assembly}{%
\subsection{Elimination of evils through the resolutions of the popular
assembly}\label{elimination-of-evils-through-the-resolutions-of-the-popular-assembly}}

\bibleverse{6} I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.
\bibleverse{7} Then I consulted with myself, and contended with the
nobles and the rulers, and said to them, ``You exact usury, everyone of
his brother.'' I held a great assembly against them. \bibleverse{8} I
said to them, ``We, after our ability, have redeemed our brothers the
Jews that were sold to the nations; and would you even sell your
brothers, and should they be sold to us?'' Then they held their peace,
and found not a word to say. \bibleverse{9} Also I said, ``The thing
that you do is not good. Shouldn't you walk in the fear of our God
because of the reproach of the nations, our enemies? \bibleverse{10} I
likewise, my brothers and my servants, lend them money and grain. Please
let us stop this usury. \bibleverse{11} Please restore to them, even
today, their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves, and their
houses, also the hundredth part of the money, and of the grain, the new
wine, and the oil, that you are charging them.'' \bibleverse{12} Then
they said, ``We will restore them, and will require nothing of them. We
will do so, even as you say.'' Then I called the priests, and took an
oath of them, that they would do according to this promise.
\bibleverse{13} Also I shook out my lap, and said, ``So may God shake
out every man from his house, and from his labor, that doesn't perform
this promise; even may he be shaken out and emptied like this.'' All the
assembly said, ``Amen,'' and praised Yahweh. The people did according to
this promise.

\hypertarget{nehemiahs-altruism-while-in-office}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah's altruism while in
office}\label{nehemiahs-altruism-while-in-office}}

\bibleverse{14} Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their
governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even to the
thirty-second year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and
my brothers have not eaten the bread of the governor. \bibleverse{15}
But the former governors who were before me were supported by the
people, and took bread and wine from them, plus forty shekels\footnote{\textbf{5:15}
  A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.} of silver; yes, even
their servants ruled over the people, but I didn't do so, because of the
fear of God. \bibleverse{16} Yes, I also continued in the work of this
wall. We didn't buy any land. All my servants were gathered there to the
work. \bibleverse{17} Moreover there were at my table, of the Jews and
the rulers, one hundred fifty men, in addition to those who came to us
from among the nations that were around us. \bibleverse{18} Now that
which was prepared for one day was one ox and six choice sheep. Also
fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days a store of all sorts of
wine. Yet for all this, I didn't demand the governor's pay, because the
bondage was heavy on this people. \bibleverse{19} Remember me, my God,
for all the good that I have done for this people.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{esquemas-y-asesinatos-de-sanbalat-y-sus-camaradas-su-rechazo-por-parte-de-nehemuxedas}{%
\subsection{Esquemas (y asesinatos) de Sanbalat y sus camaradas; su
rechazo por parte de
Nehemías}\label{esquemas-y-asesinatos-de-sanbalat-y-sus-camaradas-su-rechazo-por-parte-de-nehemuxedas}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Cuando se informó a Sanbalat, a Tobías, a Gesem el árabe
y al resto de nuestros enemigos que yo había construido el muro y que no
quedaba ninguna brecha en él (aunque hasta ese momento no había colocado
las puertas en los portones), \bibleverse{2} Sanbalat y Gesem me
enviaron a decir: ``¡Ven! Reunámonos en las aldeas de la llanura de
Ono''. Pero ellos pretendían hacerme daño.

\bibleverse{3} Les envié mensajeros diciendo: ``Estoy haciendo una gran
obra, de modo que no puedo bajar. ¿Por qué ha de cesar la obra mientras
yo la dejo y bajo a vosotros?''

\bibleverse{4} Me enviaron cuatro veces de esta manera, y yo les
respondí de la misma manera. \bibleverse{5} Entonces Sanbalat me envió a
su siervo de la misma manera la quinta vez, con una carta abierta en la
mano, \bibleverse{6} en la que estaba escrito: ``Se ha informado entre
las naciones, y lo dice Gashmu, que tú y los judíos tienen la intención
de rebelarse. Por ello, estáis construyendo el muro. Tú serías su rey,
según estas palabras. \footnote{\textbf{6:6} Esd 4,12} \bibleverse{7}
También has nombrado profetas para que proclamen de ti en Jerusalén,
diciendo: ``¡Hay un rey en Judá! Ahora se informará al rey según estas
palabras. Ven, pues, ahora, y tomemos consejo juntos''.

\bibleverse{8} Entonces le envié a decir: ``No se hacen tales cosas como
tú dices, sino que las imaginas de tu propio corazón''. \bibleverse{9}
Porque todos nos habrían hecho temer, diciendo: ``Sus manos se
debilitarán por la obra, para que no se haga''. Pero ahora, fortalece
mis manos.

\hypertarget{exponiendo-a-un-falso-profeta}{%
\subsection{Exponiendo a un falso
profeta}\label{exponiendo-a-un-falso-profeta}}

\bibleverse{10} Fui a casa de Semaías, hijo de Delaías, hijo de
Mehetabel, que estaba encerrado en su casa, y me dijo: ``Reunámonos en
la casa de Dios, dentro del templo, y cerremos las puertas del templo,
porque vendrán a matarte. Sí, en la noche vendrán a matarte''.

\bibleverse{11} Dije: ``¿Debe huir un hombre como yo? ¿Quién hay que,
siendo como yo, quiera entrar en el templo para salvar su vida? No
entraré''. \bibleverse{12} Discerní, y he aquí que Dios no lo había
enviado, sino que él pronunció esta profecía contra mí. Tobías y
Sanbalat lo habían contratado. \bibleverse{13} Lo contrataron para que
yo tuviera miedo, lo hiciera y pecara, y para que ellos tuvieran
material para un informe malo, para que me reprocharan. \footnote{\textbf{6:13}
  Núm 18,7} \bibleverse{14} ``Acuérdate, Dios mío, de Tobías y de
Sanbalat según estas sus obras, y también de la profetisa Noadías y del
resto de los profetas que me habrían hecho temer''. \footnote{\textbf{6:14}
  Neh 4,4-5}

\hypertarget{finalizaciuxf3n-de-la-construcciuxf3n-del-muro-correspondencia-sospechosa-entre-tobija-y-muchos-juduxedos-dedicados-a-uxe9l}{%
\subsection{Finalización de la construcción del muro; correspondencia
sospechosa entre Tobija y muchos judíos dedicados a
él}\label{finalizaciuxf3n-de-la-construcciuxf3n-del-muro-correspondencia-sospechosa-entre-tobija-y-muchos-juduxedos-dedicados-a-uxe9l}}

\bibleverse{15} Así que el muro fue terminado el día veinticinco de
Elul, en cincuenta y dos días. \bibleverse{16} Cuando todos nuestros
enemigos se enteraron de ello, todas las naciones que nos rodeaban
tuvieron miedo y perdieron su confianza, porque se dieron cuenta de que
esta obra era hecha por nuestro Dios. \bibleverse{17} Además, en
aquellos días los nobles de Judá enviaron muchas cartas a Tobías, y las
cartas de Tobías llegaron a ellos. \bibleverse{18} Porque había muchos
en Judá que le habían jurado por ser yerno de Secanías, hijo de Ara; y
su hijo Johanán había tomado por mujer a la hija de Mesulam, hijo de
Berequías. \bibleverse{19} También hablaron de sus buenas acciones
delante de mí, y le informaron de mis palabras. Tobías envió cartas para
atemorizarme.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{schemes-and-assassinations-of-sanballat-and-his-comrades-his-rejection-by-nehemiah}{%
\subsection{Schemes (and assassinations) of Sanballat and his comrades;
his rejection by
Nehemiah}\label{schemes-and-assassinations-of-sanballat-and-his-comrades-his-rejection-by-nehemiah}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Now when it was reported to Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the
Arabian, and to the rest of our enemies that I had built the wall, and
that there was no breach left in it (though even to that time I had not
set up the doors in the gates), \bibleverse{2} Sanballat and Geshem sent
to me, saying, ``Come! Let's meet together in the villages in the plain
of Ono.'' But they intended to harm me. \bibleverse{3} I sent messengers
to them, saying, ``I am doing a great work, so that I can't come down.
Why should the work cease while I leave it and come down to you?''
\bibleverse{4} They sent to me four times like this; and I answered them
the same way. \bibleverse{5} Then Sanballat sent his servant to me the
same way the fifth time with an open letter in his hand, \bibleverse{6}
in which was written, ``It is reported among the nations, and Gashmu
says it, that you and the Jews intend to rebel. Because of that, you are
building the wall. You would be their king, according to these words.
\bibleverse{7} You have also appointed prophets to proclaim of you at
Jerusalem, saying, `There is a king in Judah!' Now it will be reported
to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let's take
counsel together.'' \bibleverse{8} Then I sent to him, saying, ``There
are no such things done as you say, but you imagine them out of your own
heart.'' \bibleverse{9} For they all would have made us afraid, saying,
``Their hands will be weakened from the work, that it not be done.'' But
now, strengthen my hands.

\hypertarget{exposing-a-false-prophet}{%
\subsection{Exposing a false prophet}\label{exposing-a-false-prophet}}

\bibleverse{10} I went to the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the
son of Mehetabel, who was shut in at his home; and he said, ``Let us
meet together in God's house, within the temple, and let's shut the
doors of the temple; for they will come to kill you. Yes, in the night
they will come to kill you.'' \bibleverse{11} I said, ``Should a man
like me flee? Who is there that, being such as I, would go into the
temple to save his life? I will not go in.'' \bibleverse{12} I
discerned, and behold, God had not sent him, but he pronounced this
prophecy against me. Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him. \bibleverse{13}
He was hired so that I would be afraid, do so, and sin, and that they
might have material for an evil report, that they might reproach me.
\bibleverse{14} ``Remember, my God, Tobiah and Sanballat according to
these their works, and also the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the
prophets that would have put me in fear.''

\hypertarget{completion-of-wall-construction-suspicious-correspondence-between-tobija-and-many-jews-dedicated-to-him}{%
\subsection{Completion of wall construction; suspicious correspondence
between Tobija and many Jews dedicated to
him}\label{completion-of-wall-construction-suspicious-correspondence-between-tobija-and-many-jews-dedicated-to-him}}

\bibleverse{15} So the wall was finished in the twenty-fifth day of
Elul, in fifty-two days. \bibleverse{16} When all our enemies heard of
it, all the nations that were around us were afraid, and they lost their
confidence; for they perceived that this work was done by our God.
\bibleverse{17} Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many
letters to Tobiah, and Tobiah's letters came to them. \bibleverse{18}
For there were many in Judah sworn to him because he was the son-in-law
of Shecaniah the son of Arah; and his son Jehohanan had taken the
daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah as wife. \bibleverse{19} Also
they spoke of his good deeds before me, and reported my words to him.
Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-preocupaciuxf3n-de-nehemuxedas-por-la-seguridad-de-la-ciudad}{%
\subsection{La preocupación de Nehemías por la seguridad de la
ciudad}\label{la-preocupaciuxf3n-de-nehemuxedas-por-la-seguridad-de-la-ciudad}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Cuando la muralla estaba construida y yo había levantado
las puertas, y los guardias de las puertas y los cantores y los levitas
estaban designados, \bibleverse{2} puse a mi hermano Hanani, y a
Hananías, el gobernador de la fortaleza, al frente de Jerusalén, porque
era un hombre fiel y temía a Dios por encima de muchos. \bibleverse{3}
Les dije: ``No dejen que se abran las puertas de Jerusalén hasta que el
sol esté caliente; y mientras hacen guardia, que cierren las puertas y
ustedes las atranquen; y designen guardias de los habitantes de
Jerusalén, cada uno en su guardia, con cada uno cerca de su casa.''

\hypertarget{la-preocupaciuxf3n-de-nehemuxedas-por-aumentar-la-poblaciuxf3n-de-jerusaluxe9n-lista-de-los-israelitas-que-anteriormente-regresaron-del-cautiverio-con-zorobabel}{%
\subsection{La preocupación de Nehemías por aumentar la población de
Jerusalén; Lista de los israelitas que anteriormente regresaron del
cautiverio con
Zorobabel}\label{la-preocupaciuxf3n-de-nehemuxedas-por-aumentar-la-poblaciuxf3n-de-jerusaluxe9n-lista-de-los-israelitas-que-anteriormente-regresaron-del-cautiverio-con-zorobabel}}

\bibleverse{4} La ciudad era amplia y grande, pero la gente era poca y
las casas no estaban construidas.

\bibleverse{5} Mi Dios puso en mi corazón reunir a los nobles, a los
gobernantes y al pueblo, para que fueran listados por genealogía.
Encontré el libro de la genealogía de los que subieron al principio, y
encontré esto escrito en él:

\bibleverse{6} Estos son los hijos de la provincia que subieron del
cautiverio de los deportados, que Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, había
llevado, y que volvieron a Jerusalén y a Judá, cada uno a su ciudad,
\footnote{\textbf{7:6} Esd 2,1} \bibleverse{7} que vinieron con
Zorobabel, Jesúa, Nehemías, Azarías, Raamías, Nahamani, Mardoqueo,
Bilsán, Misperet, Bigvai, Nehum y Baana. El número de los hombres del
pueblo de Israel: \bibleverse{8} Los hijos de Paros: dos mil ciento
setenta y dos. \bibleverse{9} Los hijos de Sefatías: trescientos setenta
y dos. \bibleverse{10} Los hijos de Arah: seiscientos cincuenta y dos.
\bibleverse{11} Los hijos de Pahatmoab, de los hijos de Jesúa y de Joab:
dos mil ochocientos dieciocho. \bibleverse{12} Los hijos de Elam: mil
doscientos cincuenta y cuatro. \bibleverse{13} Los hijos de Zattu:
ochocientos cuarenta y cinco. \bibleverse{14} Los hijos de Zaccai:
setecientos sesenta. \bibleverse{15} Los hijos de Binnui: seiscientos
cuarenta y ocho. \bibleverse{16} Los hijos de Bebai: seiscientos
veintiocho. \bibleverse{17} Los hijos de Azgad: dos mil trescientos
veintidós. \bibleverse{18} Los hijos de Adonikam: seiscientos sesenta y
siete. \bibleverse{19} Los hijos de Bigvai: dos mil sesenta y siete.
\bibleverse{20} Los hijos de Adin: seiscientos cincuenta y cinco.
\bibleverse{21} Los hijos de Ater: de Ezequías, noventa y ocho.
\bibleverse{22} Los hijos de Hashum: trescientos veintiocho.
\bibleverse{23} Los hijos de Bezai: trescientos veinticuatro.
\bibleverse{24} Los hijos de Hariph: ciento doce. \bibleverse{25} Los
hijos de Gabaón: noventa y cinco. \bibleverse{26} Los hombres de Belén y
Netofa: ciento ochenta y ocho. \bibleverse{27} Los hombres de Anatot:
ciento veintiocho. \bibleverse{28} Los hombres de Bet Azmavet: cuarenta
y dos. \bibleverse{29} Los hombres de Kiriath Jearim, Chephirah y
Beeroth: setecientos cuarenta y tres. \bibleverse{30} Los hombres de
Rama y Geba: seiscientos veintiuno. \bibleverse{31} Los hombres de
Micmas: ciento veintidós. \bibleverse{32} Los hombres de Betel y Hai:
ciento veintitrés. \bibleverse{33} Los hombres del otro Nebo: cincuenta
y dos. \bibleverse{34} Los hijos del otro Elam: mil doscientos cincuenta
y cuatro. \bibleverse{35} Los hijos de Harim: trescientos veinte.
\bibleverse{36} Los hijos de Jericó: trescientos cuarenta y cinco.
\bibleverse{37} Los hijos de Lod, Hadid y Ono: setecientos veintiuno.
\bibleverse{38} Los hijos de Senaah: tres mil novecientos treinta.
\bibleverse{39} Los sacerdotes: Los hijos de Jedaías, de la casa de
Jesúa: novecientos setenta y tres. \bibleverse{40} Los hijos de Immer:
mil cincuenta y dos. \bibleverse{41} Los hijos de Pashur: mil doscientos
cuarenta y siete. \bibleverse{42} Los hijos de Harim: mil diecisiete.
\bibleverse{43} Los levitas: los hijos de Jesúa, de Cadmiel, de los
hijos de Hodevah: setenta y cuatro. \bibleverse{44} Los cantores: los
hijos de Asaf: ciento cuarenta y ocho. \bibleverse{45} Los porteros: los
hijos de Salum, los hijos de Ater, los hijos de Talmón, los hijos de
Acub, los hijos de Hatita, los hijos de Sobai: ciento treinta y ocho.

\bibleverse{46} Los servidores del templo: los hijos de Ziha, los hijos
de Hasupha, los hijos de Tabbaoth, \bibleverse{47} los hijos de Keros,
los hijos de Sia, los hijos de Padon, \bibleverse{48} los hijos de
Lebana, los hijos de Hagaba, los hijos de Salmai, \bibleverse{49} los
hijos de Hanan, los hijos de Giddel, los hijos de Gahar, \bibleverse{50}
los hijos de Reaiah, los hijos de Rezin, los hijos de Nekoda,
\bibleverse{51} los hijos de Gazzam, los hijos de Uzza, los hijos de
Paseah, \bibleverse{52} los hijos de Besai, los hijos de Meunim, los
hijos de Nephushesim, \bibleverse{53} los hijos de Bakbuk, los hijos de
Hakupha, los hijos de Harhur, \bibleverse{54} los hijos de Bazlith, los
hijos de Mehida, los hijos de Harsha, \bibleverse{55} los hijos de
Barkos, los hijos de Sisera, los hijos de Temah, \bibleverse{56} los
hijos de Neziah, y los hijos de Hatipha.

\bibleverse{57} Los hijos de los siervos de Salomón: los hijos de Sotai,
los hijos de Soferet, los hijos de Perida, \bibleverse{58} los hijos de
Jaala, los hijos de Darkon, los hijos de Giddel, \bibleverse{59} los
hijos de Sefatías, los hijos de Hattil, los hijos de Poqueret Hazzebaim
y los hijos de Amón. \bibleverse{60} Todos los siervos del templo y los
hijos de los siervos de Salomón eran trescientos noventa y dos.

\bibleverse{61} Estos fueron los que subieron de Tel Melah, Tel Harsha,
Querubín, Addón e Immer; pero no pudieron mostrar las casas de sus
padres, ni su descendencia, si eran de Israel: \bibleverse{62} Los hijos
de Delaía, los hijos de Tobías y los hijos de Necoda: seiscientos
cuarenta y dos. \bibleverse{63} De los sacerdotes: los hijos de Hobaiah,
los hijos de Hakkoz, los hijos de Barzillai, el cual tomó mujer de las
hijas de Barzillai Galaadita, y fue llamado según su nombre.

\bibleverse{64} Estos buscaron sus registros genealógicos, pero no
pudieron encontrarlos. Por lo tanto, fueron considerados descalificados
y apartados del sacerdocio. \bibleverse{65} El gobernador les dijo que
no comieran de las cosas más sagradas hasta que un sacerdote se
levantara para ministrar con el Urim y el Tumim.

\bibleverse{66} Toda la asamblea reunida era de cuarenta y dos mil
trescientos sesenta, \bibleverse{67} además de sus siervos y siervas,
que eran siete mil trescientos treinta y siete. Tenían doscientos
cuarenta y cinco hombres cantores y mujeres cantoras. \bibleverse{68}
Sus caballos eran setecientos treinta y seis; sus mulos, doscientos
cuarenta y cinco; \bibleverse{69} sus camellos, cuatrocientos treinta y
cinco; sus asnos, seis mil setecientos veinte.

\bibleverse{70} Algunos de entre los jefes de familia dieron para la
obra. El gobernador dio para el tesoro mil dáricos de oro, cincuenta
cuencas, y quinientos treinta vestidos sacerdotales. \footnote{\textbf{7:70}
  Neh 7,65} \bibleverse{71} Algunos de los jefes de familia dieron para
el tesoro de la obra veinte mil dáricos de oro, y dos mil doscientas
minas de plata. \bibleverse{72} Lo que dio el resto del pueblo fue
veinte mil dáricos de oro, más dos mil minas de plata, y sesenta y siete
vestiduras sacerdotales.

\bibleverse{73} Así, los sacerdotes, los levitas, los porteros, los
cantores, parte del pueblo, los servidores del templo y todo Israel
vivían en sus ciudades. Cuando llegó el séptimo mes, los hijos de Israel
estaban en sus ciudades.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{nehemiahs-concern-for-the-safety-of-the-city}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah's concern for the safety of the
city}\label{nehemiahs-concern-for-the-safety-of-the-city}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} Now when the wall was built and I had set up the doors,
and the gatekeepers and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
\bibleverse{2} I put my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the governor of the
fortress, in charge of Jerusalem; for he was a faithful man and feared
God above many. \bibleverse{3} I said to them, ``Don't let the gates of
Jerusalem be opened until the sun is hot; and while they stand guard,
let them shut the doors, and you bar them; and appoint watches of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, everyone in his watch, with everyone near his
house.''

\hypertarget{nehemiahs-concern-to-increase-the-population-of-jerusalem-list-of-israelites-who-previously-returned-from-captivity-with-zerubbabel}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah's concern to increase the population of Jerusalem;
List of Israelites who previously returned from captivity with
Zerubbabel}\label{nehemiahs-concern-to-increase-the-population-of-jerusalem-list-of-israelites-who-previously-returned-from-captivity-with-zerubbabel}}

\bibleverse{4} Now the city was wide and large; but the people were few
therein, and the houses were not built. \bibleverse{5} My God put into
my heart to gather together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people,
that they might be listed by genealogy. I found the book of the
genealogy of those who came up at the first, and I found this written in
it: \bibleverse{6} These are the children of the province who went up
out of the captivity of those who had been carried away, whom
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and who returned to
Jerusalem and to Judah, everyone to his city, \bibleverse{7} who came
with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai,
Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah. The number of the men of
the people of Israel: \bibleverse{8} The children of Parosh: two
thousand one hundred seventy-two. \bibleverse{9} The children of
Shephatiah: three hundred seventy-two. \bibleverse{10} The children of
Arah: six hundred fifty-two. \bibleverse{11} The children of Pahathmoab,
of the children of Jeshua and Joab: two thousand eight hundred eighteen.
\bibleverse{12} The children of Elam: one thousand two hundred
fifty-four. \bibleverse{13} The children of Zattu: eight hundred
forty-five. \bibleverse{14} The children of Zaccai: seven hundred sixty.
\bibleverse{15} The children of Binnui: six hundred forty-eight.
\bibleverse{16} The children of Bebai: six hundred twenty-eight.
\bibleverse{17} The children of Azgad: two thousand three hundred
twenty-two. \bibleverse{18} The children of Adonikam: six hundred
sixty-seven. \bibleverse{19} The children of Bigvai: two thousand
sixty-seven. \bibleverse{20} The children of Adin: six hundred
fifty-five. \bibleverse{21} The children of Ater: of Hezekiah,
ninety-eight. \bibleverse{22} The children of Hashum: three hundred
twenty-eight. \bibleverse{23} The children of Bezai: three hundred
twenty-four. \bibleverse{24} The children of Hariph: one hundred twelve.
\bibleverse{25} The children of Gibeon: ninety-five. \bibleverse{26} The
men of Bethlehem and Netophah: one hundred eighty-eight. \bibleverse{27}
The men of Anathoth: one hundred twenty-eight. \bibleverse{28} The men
of Beth Azmaveth: forty-two. \bibleverse{29} The men of Kiriath Jearim,
Chephirah, and Beeroth: seven hundred forty-three. \bibleverse{30} The
men of Ramah and Geba: six hundred twenty-one. \bibleverse{31} The men
of Michmas: one hundred twenty-two. \bibleverse{32} The men of Bethel
and Ai: one hundred twenty-three. \bibleverse{33} The men of the other
Nebo: fifty-two. \bibleverse{34} The children of the other Elam: one
thousand two hundred fifty-four. \bibleverse{35} The children of Harim:
three hundred twenty. \bibleverse{36} The children of Jericho: three
hundred forty-five. \bibleverse{37} The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono:
seven hundred twenty-one. \bibleverse{38} The children of Senaah: three
thousand nine hundred thirty. \bibleverse{39} The priests: The children
of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua: nine hundred seventy-three.
\bibleverse{40} The children of Immer: one thousand fifty-two.
\bibleverse{41} The children of Pashhur: one thousand two hundred
forty-seven. \bibleverse{42} The children of Harim: one thousand
seventeen. \bibleverse{43} The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of
Kadmiel, of the children of Hodevah: seventy-four. \bibleverse{44} The
singers: the children of Asaph: one hundred forty-eight. \bibleverse{45}
The gatekeepers: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the
children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the
children of Shobai: one hundred thirty-eight. \bibleverse{46} The temple
servants: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of
Tabbaoth, \bibleverse{47} the children of Keros, the children of Sia,
the children of Padon, \bibleverse{48} the children of Lebana, the
children of Hagaba, the children of Salmai, \bibleverse{49} the children
of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, \bibleverse{50}
the children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda,
\bibleverse{51} the children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the
children of Paseah, \bibleverse{52} the children of Besai, the children
of Meunim, the children of Nephushesim, \bibleverse{53} the children of
Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur, \bibleverse{54}
the children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,
\bibleverse{55} the children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the
children of Temah, \bibleverse{56} the children of Neziah, and the
children of Hatipha. \bibleverse{57} The children of Solomon's servants:
the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of
Perida, \bibleverse{58} the children of Jaala, the children of Darkon,
the children of Giddel, \bibleverse{59} the children of Shephatiah, the
children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth Hazzebaim, and the
children of Amon. \bibleverse{60} All the temple servants and the
children of Solomon's servants were three hundred ninety-two.
\bibleverse{61} These were those who went up from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha,
Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but they could not show their fathers' houses,
nor their offspring,\footnote{\textbf{7:61} or, seed} whether they were
of Israel: \bibleverse{62} The children of Delaiah, the children of
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda: six hundred forty-two. \bibleverse{63}
Of the priests: the children of Hobaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the
children of Barzillai, who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the
Gileadite, and was called after their name. \bibleverse{64} These
searched for their genealogical records, but couldn't find them.
Therefore they were deemed disqualified and removed from the priesthood.
\bibleverse{65} The governor told them not to eat of the most holy
things until a priest stood up to minister with Urim and Thummim.
\bibleverse{66} The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three
hundred sixty, \bibleverse{67} in addition to their male servants and
their female servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred
thirty-seven. They had two hundred forty-five singing men and singing
women. \bibleverse{68} Their horses were seven hundred thirty-six; their
mules, two hundred forty-five; \bibleverse{69} their camels, four
hundred thirty-five; their donkeys, six thousand seven hundred twenty.
\bibleverse{70} Some from among the heads of fathers' households gave to
the work. The governor gave to the treasury one thousand darics of
gold,\footnote{\textbf{7:70} a daric was a gold coin issued by a Persian
  king, weighing about 8.4 grams or about 0.27 troy ounces each.} fifty
basins, and five hundred thirty priests' garments. \bibleverse{71} Some
of the heads of fathers' households gave into the treasury of the work
twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand two hundred
minas\footnote{\textbf{7:71} A mina is about 600 grams or 1.3 U. S.
  pounds, so 2,200 minas is about 1.3 metric tons.} of silver.
\bibleverse{72} That which the rest of the people gave was twenty
thousand darics of gold, plus two thousand minas of silver, and
sixty-seven priests' garments. \bibleverse{73} So the priests, the
Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple
servants, and all Israel lived in their cities. When the seventh month
had come, the children of Israel were in their cities.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{lectura-de-la-ley-por-esdras-y-celebraciuxf3n-de-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos}{%
\subsection{Lectura de la ley por Esdras y celebración de la Fiesta de
los
Tabernáculos}\label{lectura-de-la-ley-por-esdras-y-celebraciuxf3n-de-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} Todo el pueblo se reunió como un solo hombre en el lugar
amplio que estaba frente a la puerta de las aguas, y hablaron a Esdras
el escriba para que trajera el libro de la ley de Moisés, que Yahvé
había ordenado a Israel. \footnote{\textbf{8:1} Esd 7,6} \bibleverse{2}
El sacerdote Esdras trajo la ley ante la asamblea, tanto de hombres como
de mujeres, y de todos los que podían oír con entendimiento, el primer
día del mes séptimo. \footnote{\textbf{8:2} Deut 31,10-13}
\bibleverse{3} Leyó de ella ante el lugar amplio que estaba frente a la
puerta de las aguas, desde la mañana hasta el mediodía, en presencia de
los hombres y de las mujeres, y de los que podían entender. Los oídos de
todo el pueblo estaban atentos al libro de la ley. \bibleverse{4}
Esdras, el escriba, estaba de pie sobre un púlpito de madera que habían
hecho al efecto; y junto a él estaban Matatías, Sema, Anáías, Urías,
Hilcías y Maasías, a su derecha; y a su izquierda, Pedaías, Misael,
Malquías, Hasum, Hasbaddana, Zacarías y Mesulam. \bibleverse{5} Esdras
abrió el libro a la vista de todo el pueblo (porque él estaba por encima
de todo el pueblo), y cuando lo abrió, todo el pueblo se puso de pie.
\bibleverse{6} Entonces Esdras bendijo a Yavé, el gran Dios. Todo el
pueblo respondió: ``Amén, Amén'', levantando las manos. Inclinaron la
cabeza y adoraron a Yavé con el rostro en tierra. \bibleverse{7} También
Jesúa, Baní, Serebías, Jamín, Acub, Sabetai, Hodías, Maasías, Kelita,
Azarías, Jozabad, Hanán, Pelaías y los levitas, hicieron que el pueblo
entendiera la ley; y el pueblo permaneció en su lugar. \bibleverse{8}
Leían en el libro, en la ley de Dios, claramente; y daban el sentido, de
modo que entendían la lectura.

\hypertarget{la-invitaciuxf3n-de-nehemuxedas-y-esdras-a-las-personas-afligidas-a-celebrar-el-duxeda-con-alegruxeda-festiva}{%
\subsection{La invitación de Nehemías y Esdras a las personas afligidas
a celebrar el día con alegría
festiva}\label{la-invitaciuxf3n-de-nehemuxedas-y-esdras-a-las-personas-afligidas-a-celebrar-el-duxeda-con-alegruxeda-festiva}}

\bibleverse{9} Nehemías, que era el gobernador, el sacerdote y escriba
Esdras, y los levitas que enseñaban al pueblo, dijeron a todo el pueblo:
``Hoy es un día santo para Yahvé, vuestro Dios. No os lamentéis ni
lloréis''. Porque todo el pueblo lloró al oír las palabras de la ley.
\footnote{\textbf{8:9} Neh 5,14} \bibleverse{10} Luego les dijo:
``Vayan. Coman la grasa, beban lo dulce y envíen porciones a quien no
tiene nada preparado, porque hoy es santo para nuestro Señor. No os
entristezcáis, porque la alegría de Yahvé es vuestra fuerza''.

\bibleverse{11} Entonces los levitas calmaron a todo el pueblo,
diciendo: ``Callad, porque el día es sagrado. No se aflijan''.

\bibleverse{12} Todo el pueblo siguió su camino para comer, beber,
enviar porciones y celebrar, porque habían entendido las palabras que se
les habían declarado.

\hypertarget{celebraciuxf3n-de-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos-con-lectura-constante-de-la-ley}{%
\subsection{Celebración de la Fiesta de los Tabernáculos con lectura
constante de la
ley}\label{celebraciuxf3n-de-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos-con-lectura-constante-de-la-ley}}

\bibleverse{13} Al segundo día, los jefes de familia de todo el pueblo,
los sacerdotes y los levitas se reunieron con Esdras, el escriba, para
estudiar las palabras de la ley. \bibleverse{14} Encontraron escrito en
la ley cómo Yahvé había ordenado por medio de Moisés que los hijos de
Israel debían habitar en cabañas en la fiesta del séptimo mes;
\footnote{\textbf{8:14} Lev 23,42} \bibleverse{15} y que debían publicar
y proclamar en todas sus ciudades y en Jerusalén, diciendo: ``Salgan al
monte y traigan ramas de olivo, ramas de olivo silvestre, ramas de
mirto, ramas de palmeras y ramas de árboles frondosos, para hacer
refugios temporales, como está escrito.''

\bibleverse{16} Así que el pueblo salió y los trajo, y se hicieron
refugios temporales, cada uno en el techo de su casa, en sus patios, en
los patios de la casa de Dios, en el lugar ancho de la puerta de las
aguas y en el lugar ancho de la puerta de Efraín. \footnote{\textbf{8:16}
  Neh 8,1} \bibleverse{17} Toda la asamblea de los que habían regresado
del cautiverio hizo refugios temporales y vivió en los refugios
temporales, pues desde los días de Josué hijo de Nun hasta ese día los
hijos de Israel no lo habían hecho. Hubo una alegría muy grande.
\bibleverse{18} Además, cada día, desde el primero hasta el último, se
leía en el libro de la ley de Dios. Celebraron la fiesta durante siete
días; y el octavo día hubo una asamblea solemne, según la ordenanza.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{reading-of-the-law-by-ezra-and-celebration-of-the-feast-of-tabernacles}{%
\subsection{Reading of the law by Ezra and celebration of the Feast of
Tabernacles}\label{reading-of-the-law-by-ezra-and-celebration-of-the-feast-of-tabernacles}}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} All the people gathered themselves together as one man
into the wide place that was in front of the water gate; and they spoke
to Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which Yahweh
had commanded to Israel. \bibleverse{2} Ezra the priest brought the law
before the assembly, both men and women, and all who could hear with
understanding, on the first day of the seventh month. \bibleverse{3} He
read from it before the wide place that was in front of the water gate
from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the
women, and of those who could understand. The ears of all the people
were attentive to the book of the law. \bibleverse{4} Ezra the scribe
stood on a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and
beside him stood Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and
Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, Mishael,
Malchijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
\bibleverse{5} Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people (for
he was above all the people), and when he opened it, all the people
stood up. \bibleverse{6} Then Ezra blessed Yahweh, the great God. All
the people answered, ``Amen, Amen,'' with the lifting up of their hands.
They bowed their heads, and worshiped Yahweh with their faces to the
ground. \bibleverse{7} Also Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub,
Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah,
and the Levites, caused the people to understand the law; and the people
stayed in their place. \bibleverse{8} They read in the book, in the law
of God, distinctly; and they gave the sense, so that they understood the
reading.

\hypertarget{nehemiah-and-ezras-invitation-to-mourners-to-celebrate-the-day-with-festive-cheer}{%
\subsection{Nehemiah and Ezra's invitation to mourners to celebrate the
day with festive
cheer}\label{nehemiah-and-ezras-invitation-to-mourners-to-celebrate-the-day-with-festive-cheer}}

\bibleverse{9} Nehemiah, who was the governor, Ezra the priest and
scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people,
``Today is holy to Yahweh your God. Don't mourn, nor weep.'' For all the
people wept when they heard the words of the law. \bibleverse{10} Then
he said to them, ``Go your way. Eat the fat, drink the sweet, and send
portions to him for whom nothing is prepared, for today is holy to our
Lord. Don't be grieved, for the joy of Yahweh is your strength.''
\bibleverse{11} So the Levites calmed all the people, saying, ``Hold
your peace, for the day is holy. Don't be grieved.'' \bibleverse{12} All
the people went their way to eat, to drink, to send portions, and to
celebrate, because they had understood the words that were declared to
them.

\hypertarget{celebration-of-the-feast-of-tabernacles-with-constant-reading-of-the-law}{%
\subsection{Celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles with constant
reading of the
law}\label{celebration-of-the-feast-of-tabernacles-with-constant-reading-of-the-law}}

\bibleverse{13} On the second day, the heads of fathers' households of
all the people, the priests, and the Levites were gathered together to
Ezra the scribe, to study the words of the law. \bibleverse{14} They
found written in the law how Yahweh had commanded by Moses that the
children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh
month; \bibleverse{15} and that they should publish and proclaim in all
their cities and in Jerusalem, saying, ``Go out to the mountain, and get
olive branches, branches of wild olive, myrtle branches, palm branches,
and branches of thick trees, to make temporary shelters,\footnote{\textbf{8:15}
  or, booths} as it is written.'' \bibleverse{16} So the people went out
and brought them, and made themselves temporary shelters,\footnote{\textbf{8:16}
  or, booths} everyone on the roof of his house, in their courts, in the
courts of God's house, in the wide place of the water gate, and in the
wide place of Ephraim's gate. \bibleverse{17} All the assembly of those
who had come back out of the captivity made temporary
shelters\footnote{\textbf{8:17} or, booths} and lived in the temporary
shelters, for since the days of Joshua the son of Nun to that day the
children of Israel had not done so. There was very great gladness.
\bibleverse{18} Also day by day, from the first day to the last day, he
read in the book of the law of God. They kept the feast seven days; and
on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according to the ordinance.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{celebraciuxf3n-del-duxeda-de-la-penitencia-con-varias-horas-de-lectura-de-la-ley-y-varias-horas-de-confesiuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Celebración del día de la penitencia con varias horas de
lectura de la ley y varias horas de
confesión}\label{celebraciuxf3n-del-duxeda-de-la-penitencia-con-varias-horas-de-lectura-de-la-ley-y-varias-horas-de-confesiuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} El día veinticuatro de este mes se reunieron los hijos de
Israel con ayuno, con cilicio y con tierra sobre ellos. \bibleverse{2}
Los descendientes de Israel se separaron de todos los extranjeros y se
pusieron de pie y confesaron sus pecados y las iniquidades de sus
padres. \bibleverse{3} Se pusieron de pie en su lugar y leyeron en el
libro de la ley de Yavé su Dios la cuarta parte del día; y la cuarta
parte la confesaron y adoraron a Yavé su Dios. \bibleverse{4} Entonces
Jesúa, Baní, Cadmiel, Sebanías, Buní, Serebías, Baní y Quenaní, de los
levitas, se pusieron de pie en la escalera y clamaron en voz alta a Yavé
su Dios.

\hypertarget{invitaciuxf3n-a-alabar-a-dios-referencia-a-los-maravillosos-actos-de-poder-y-gracia-de-dios-en-tiempos-prehistuxf3ricos-hasta-la-introducciuxf3n-de-su-pueblo-en-la-tierra-prometida}{%
\subsection{Invitación a alabar a Dios; Referencia a los maravillosos
actos de poder y gracia de Dios en tiempos prehistóricos hasta la
introducción de su pueblo en la tierra
prometida}\label{invitaciuxf3n-a-alabar-a-dios-referencia-a-los-maravillosos-actos-de-poder-y-gracia-de-dios-en-tiempos-prehistuxf3ricos-hasta-la-introducciuxf3n-de-su-pueblo-en-la-tierra-prometida}}

\bibleverse{5} Entonces los levitas, Jesúa y Cadmiel, Baní, Hasabneías,
Serebías, Hodías, Sebanías y Petaías, dijeron: ``¡Ponte de pie y bendice
a Yahvé, tu Dios, desde la eternidad hasta la eternidad! ¡Bendito sea tu
nombre glorioso, que es exaltado sobre toda bendición y alabanza!
\bibleverse{6} Tú eres Yahvé, tú solo. Tú has hecho el cielo, el cielo
de los cielos, con todo su ejército, la tierra y todo lo que hay en
ella, los mares y todo lo que hay en ellos, y tú lo conservas todo. El
ejército de los cielos te adora. \bibleverse{7} Tú eres Yahvé, el Dios
que eligió a Abram, lo sacó de Ur de los Caldeos, le dio el nombre de
Abraham, \footnote{\textbf{9:7} Gén 11,31; Gén 17,5} \bibleverse{8}
encontró su corazón fiel ante ti, e hizo un pacto con él para darle la
tierra del cananeo, del hitita, del amorreo, del ferezeo, del jebuseo y
del gergeseo, para dársela a su descendencia, y has cumplido tus
palabras, porque eres justo. \footnote{\textbf{9:8} Gén 15,18-21}

\bibleverse{9} ``Viste la aflicción de nuestros padres en Egipto, y
oíste su clamor junto al Mar Rojo, \footnote{\textbf{9:9} Éxod 3,7}
\bibleverse{10} y mostraste señales y prodigios contra el Faraón, contra
todos sus siervos y contra todo el pueblo de su tierra, porque sabías
que se burlaban de ellos, y te hiciste un nombre, como lo es hoy.
\bibleverse{11} Dividiste el mar delante de ellos, de modo que pasaron
por el medio del mar en seco; y arrojaste a sus perseguidores a las
profundidades, como una piedra a las aguas impetuosas. \footnote{\textbf{9:11}
  Éxod 14,21; Éxod 15,5; Éxod 15,10} \bibleverse{12} Además, en una
columna de nube los guiaste de día, y en una columna de fuego de noche,
para alumbrarles el camino que debían seguir. \footnote{\textbf{9:12}
  Éxod 13,21}

\bibleverse{13} ``También bajaste al monte Sinaí, y hablaste con ellos
desde el cielo, y les diste ordenanzas rectas y leyes verdaderas, buenos
estatutos y mandamientos, \footnote{\textbf{9:13} Éxod 19,18; Éxod 20,1}
\bibleverse{14} y les diste a conocer tu santo sábado, y les ordenaste
mandamientos, estatutos y una ley, por medio de Moisés, tu siervo,
\bibleverse{15} y les diste pan del cielo para su hambre, y les sacaste
agua de la roca para su sed, y les ordenaste que entraran a poseer la
tierra que habías jurado darles. \footnote{\textbf{9:15} Éxod 16,4; Éxod
  16,14; Éxod 17,6}

\bibleverse{16} ``Pero ellos y nuestros padres se comportaron con
soberbia, endurecieron su cerviz, no escucharon tus mandamientos,
\footnote{\textbf{9:16} Éxod 32,9} \bibleverse{17} y se negaron a
obedecer. No tuvieron en cuenta tus maravillas que hiciste entre ellos,
sino que endurecieron su cerviz, y en su rebeldía nombraron un capitán
para volver a su esclavitud. Pero tú eres un Dios dispuesto a perdonar,
clemente y misericordioso, lento para la ira y abundante en bondades, y
no los abandonaste. \footnote{\textbf{9:17} Núm 14,4; Éxod 34,6}
\bibleverse{18} Sí, cuando se hicieron un becerro moldeado y dijeron:
``Este es vuestro Dios, que os hizo subir de Egipto'', y cometieron
horribles blasfemias, \footnote{\textbf{9:18} Éxod 32,4} \bibleverse{19}
pero tú, en tus múltiples misericordias, no los abandonaste en el
desierto. La columna de nube no se apartó de ellos durante el día para
guiarlos por el camino, ni la columna de fuego durante la noche para
mostrarles la luz y el camino que debían seguir. \bibleverse{20} También
diste tu buen Espíritu para instruirlos, y no retuviste tu maná de su
boca, y les diste agua para su sed. \footnote{\textbf{9:20} Núm 11,25}

\bibleverse{21} ``Sí, cuarenta años los sostuviste en el desierto. Nada
les faltó. Sus vestidos no envejecieron y sus pies no se hincharon.
\footnote{\textbf{9:21} Deut 8,4} \bibleverse{22} Además, les diste
reinos y pueblos, que asignaste según sus porciones. Así poseyeron la
tierra de Sehón, la tierra del rey de Hesbón y la tierra de Og, rey de
Basán. \footnote{\textbf{9:22} Núm 21,24; Núm 21,35} \bibleverse{23}
También multiplicaste sus hijos como las estrellas del cielo, y los
introdujiste en la tierra sobre la que habías dicho a sus padres que
entrarían a poseerla.

\bibleverse{24} ``Así que los hijos entraron y poseyeron la tierra; y tú
sometiste ante ellos a los habitantes de la tierra, los cananeos, y los
entregaste en sus manos, con sus reyes y los pueblos de la tierra, para
que hicieran con ellos lo que quisieran. \footnote{\textbf{9:24} Jos
  12,1} \bibleverse{25} Tomaron ciudades fortificadas y una tierra rica,
y poseyeron casas llenas de todos los bienes, cisternas excavadas,
viñas, olivares y árboles frutales en abundancia. Así comieron, se
saciaron, engordaron y se deleitaron en tu gran bondad. \footnote{\textbf{9:25}
  Deut 6,10-11; Deut 32,15}

\hypertarget{en-posesiuxf3n-de-la-tierra-el-pueblo-con-desprecio-por-los-profetas-y-la-divina-paciencia-continuxfaa-con-su-conducta-pecaminosa-hasta-que-dios-los-entrega-en-manos-de-los-gentiles}{%
\subsection{En posesión de la tierra, el pueblo, con desprecio por los
profetas y la divina paciencia, continúa con su conducta pecaminosa
hasta que Dios los entrega en manos de los
gentiles}\label{en-posesiuxf3n-de-la-tierra-el-pueblo-con-desprecio-por-los-profetas-y-la-divina-paciencia-continuxfaa-con-su-conducta-pecaminosa-hasta-que-dios-los-entrega-en-manos-de-los-gentiles}}

\bibleverse{26} ``Sin embargo, fueron desobedientes y se rebelaron
contra ti, echaron tu ley a sus espaldas, mataron a tus profetas que
testificaban contra ellos para que se volvieran a ti, y cometieron
horribles blasfemias. \bibleverse{27} Por eso los entregaste en manos de
sus adversarios, que los angustiaron. En el tiempo de su angustia,
cuando clamaron a ti, tú oíste desde el cielo; y según tus múltiples
misericordias les diste salvadores que los salvaron de las manos de sus
adversarios. \footnote{\textbf{9:27} Jue 3,9; Jue 3,15} \bibleverse{28}
Pero después de haber descansado, volvieron a hacer el mal ante ti; por
eso los dejaste en manos de sus enemigos, para que se enseñorearan de
ellos; sin embargo, cuando volvieron y clamaron a ti, tú oíste desde el
cielo; y muchas veces los libraste según tus misericordias, \footnote{\textbf{9:28}
  Jue 2,18-21} \bibleverse{29} y diste testimonio contra ellos, para que
volvieran a tu ley. Sin embargo, fueron arrogantes y no escucharon tus
mandamientos, sino que pecaron contra tus ordenanzas (que si el hombre
hace, vivirá en ellas), volvieron la espalda, endurecieron su cerviz y
no quisieron escuchar. \footnote{\textbf{9:29} Lev 18,5} \bibleverse{30}
Sin embargo, durante muchos años los aguantaste y les diste testimonio
con tu Espíritu por medio de tus profetas. Sin embargo, no quisieron
escuchar. Por eso los entregaste en manos de los pueblos de las tierras.
\footnote{\textbf{9:30} Jer 7,25-26; Jer 44,4-6}

\bibleverse{31} ``Sin embargo, en tus múltiples misericordias, no les
pusiste fin ni los abandonaste, porque eres un Dios clemente y
misericordioso. \footnote{\textbf{9:31} Lam 3,22}

\hypertarget{pida-nueva-gracia-y-lealtad-y-el-alivio-del-bien-merecido-sufrimiento-desde-el-dominio-asirio-hasta-el-presente}{%
\subsection{Pida nueva gracia y lealtad y el alivio del bien merecido
sufrimiento desde el dominio asirio hasta el
presente}\label{pida-nueva-gracia-y-lealtad-y-el-alivio-del-bien-merecido-sufrimiento-desde-el-dominio-asirio-hasta-el-presente}}

\bibleverse{32} Ahora, pues, Dios nuestro, el grande, el poderoso y el
imponente, que guarda el pacto y la bondad amorosa, no dejes que te
parezcan pequeños todos los trabajos que nos han sobrevenido, a nuestros
reyes, a nuestros príncipes, a nuestros sacerdotes, a nuestros profetas,
a nuestros padres y a todo tu pueblo, desde el tiempo de los reyes de
Asiria hasta hoy. \footnote{\textbf{9:32} Neh 1,5} \bibleverse{33} Sin
embargo, tú eres justo en todo lo que ha recaído sobre nosotros; porque
tú has actuado con verdad, pero nosotros hemos hecho maldad. \footnote{\textbf{9:33}
  Esd 9,15; Dan 9,5; Dan 9,7} \bibleverse{34} También nuestros reyes,
nuestros príncipes, nuestros sacerdotes y nuestros padres no han
guardado tu ley, ni han escuchado tus mandamientos y tus testimonios con
los que testificaste contra ellos. \bibleverse{35} Porque no te han
servido en su reino y en tu gran bondad que les diste, y en la tierra
grande y rica que les diste. No se convirtieron de sus obras malvadas.

\bibleverse{36} ``He aquí que hoy somos siervos, y en cuanto a la tierra
que diste a nuestros padres para comer su fruto y su bien, he aquí que
somos siervos en ella. \bibleverse{37} La tierra da muchos frutos a los
reyes que has puesto sobre nosotros a causa de nuestros pecados. También
tienen poder sobre nuestros cuerpos y sobre nuestro ganado, a su antojo,
y estamos en gran aflicción. \bibleverse{38} Sin embargo, por todo esto,
hacemos un pacto seguro y lo escribimos; y nuestros príncipes, nuestros
levitas y nuestros sacerdotes lo sellan.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{celebration-of-the-day-of-penance-with-several-hours-of-reading-the-law-and-several-hours-of-confession}{%
\subsection{Celebration of the day of penance with several hours of
reading the law and several hours of
confession}\label{celebration-of-the-day-of-penance-with-several-hours-of-reading-the-law-and-several-hours-of-confession}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} Now in the twenty-fourth day of this month the children
of Israel were assembled with fasting, with sackcloth, and dirt on them.
\bibleverse{2} The offspring of Israel separated themselves from all
foreigners and stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of
their fathers. \bibleverse{3} They stood up in their place, and read in
the book of the law of Yahweh their God a fourth part of the day; and a
fourth part they confessed and worshiped Yahweh their God.
\bibleverse{4} Then Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah,
Bani, and Chenani of the Levites stood up on the stairs, and cried with
a loud voice to Yahweh their God.

\hypertarget{invitation-to-praise-god-reference-to-the-wonderful-acts-of-power-and-grace-of-god-in-prehistoric-times-until-the-introduction-of-his-people-in-the-promised-land}{%
\subsection{Invitation to praise God; Reference to the wonderful acts of
power and grace of God in prehistoric times until the introduction of
his people in the promised
land}\label{invitation-to-praise-god-reference-to-the-wonderful-acts-of-power-and-grace-of-god-in-prehistoric-times-until-the-introduction-of-his-people-in-the-promised-land}}

\bibleverse{5} Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah,
Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, ``Stand up and bless
Yahweh your God from everlasting to everlasting! Blessed be your
glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise!
\bibleverse{6} You are Yahweh, even you alone. You have made heaven, the
heaven of heavens, with all their army, the earth and all things that
are on it, the seas and all that is in them, and you preserve them all.
The army of heaven worships you. \bibleverse{7} You are Yahweh, the God
who chose Abram, brought him out of Ur of the Chaldees, gave him the
name of Abraham, \bibleverse{8} found his heart faithful before you, and
made a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite,
the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Jebusite, and the Girgashite, to give it
to his offspring, and have performed your words, for you are righteous.
\bibleverse{9} ``You saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and
heard their cry by the Red Sea, \bibleverse{10} and showed signs and
wonders against Pharaoh, against all his servants, and against all the
people of his land, for you knew that they dealt proudly against them,
and made a name for yourself, as it is today. \bibleverse{11} You
divided the sea before them, so that they went through the middle of the
sea on the dry land; and you cast their pursuers into the depths, as a
stone into the mighty waters. \bibleverse{12} Moreover, in a pillar of
cloud you led them by day; and in a pillar of fire by night, to give
them light in the way in which they should go. \bibleverse{13} ``You
also came down on Mount Sinai, and spoke with them from heaven, and gave
them right ordinances and true laws, good statutes and commandments,
\bibleverse{14} and made known to them your holy Sabbath, and commanded
them commandments, statutes, and a law, by Moses your servant,
\bibleverse{15} and gave them bread from the sky for their hunger, and
brought water out of the rock for them for their thirst, and commanded
them that they should go in to possess the land which you had sworn to
give them. \bibleverse{16} ``But they and our fathers behaved proudly,
hardened their neck, didn't listen to your commandments, \bibleverse{17}
and refused to obey. They weren't mindful of your wonders that you did
among them, but hardened their neck, and in their rebellion appointed a
captain to return to their bondage. But you are a God ready to pardon,
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness,
and didn't forsake them. \bibleverse{18} Yes, when they had made
themselves a molded calf, and said, `This is your God who brought you up
out of Egypt,' and had committed awful blasphemies, \bibleverse{19} yet
you in your manifold mercies didn't forsake them in the wilderness. The
pillar of cloud didn't depart from over them by day, to lead them in the
way; neither did the pillar of fire by night, to show them light, and
the way in which they should go. \bibleverse{20} You gave also your good
Spirit to instruct them, and didn't withhold your manna from their
mouth, and gave them water for their thirst. \bibleverse{21} ``Yes,
forty years you sustained them in the wilderness. They lacked nothing.
Their clothes didn't grow old, and their feet didn't swell.
\bibleverse{22} Moreover you gave them kingdoms and peoples, which you
allotted according to their portions. So they possessed the land of
Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of
Bashan. \bibleverse{23} You also multiplied their children as the stars
of the sky, and brought them into the land concerning which you said to
their fathers that they should go in to possess it. \bibleverse{24} ``So
the children went in and possessed the land; and you subdued before them
the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gave them into their
hands, with their kings and the peoples of the land, that they might do
with them as they pleased. \bibleverse{25} They took fortified cities
and a rich land, and possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns
dug out, vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. So they
ate, were filled, became fat, and delighted themselves in your great
goodness.

\hypertarget{in-possession-of-the-land-the-people-with-contempt-for-the-prophets-and-divine-patience-continue-their-sinful-conduct-until-god-hands-them-over-to-the-gentiles}{%
\subsection{In possession of the land, the people, with contempt for the
prophets and divine patience, continue their sinful conduct until God
hands them over to the
Gentiles}\label{in-possession-of-the-land-the-people-with-contempt-for-the-prophets-and-divine-patience-continue-their-sinful-conduct-until-god-hands-them-over-to-the-gentiles}}

\bibleverse{26} ``Nevertheless they were disobedient and rebelled
against you, cast your law behind their back, killed your prophets that
testified against them to turn them again to you, and they committed
awful blasphemies. \bibleverse{27} Therefore you delivered them into the
hand of their adversaries, who distressed them. In the time of their
trouble, when they cried to you, you heard from heaven; and according to
your manifold mercies you gave them saviors who saved them out of the
hands of their adversaries. \bibleverse{28} But after they had rest,
they did evil again before you; therefore you left them in the hands of
their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them; yet when they
returned and cried to you, you heard from heaven; and many times you
delivered them according to your mercies, \bibleverse{29} and testified
against them, that you might bring them again to your law. Yet they were
arrogant, and didn't listen to your commandments, but sinned against
your ordinances (which if a man does, he shall live in them), turned
their backs, stiffened their neck, and would not hear. \bibleverse{30}
Yet many years you put up with them, and testified against them by your
Spirit through your prophets. Yet they would not listen. Therefore you
gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands. \bibleverse{31}
``Nevertheless in your manifold mercies you didn't make a full end of
them, nor forsake them; for you are a gracious and merciful God.

\hypertarget{ask-for-new-grace-and-loyalty-and-relief-from-well-deserved-suffering-from-assyrian-rule-to-the-present}{%
\subsection{Ask for new grace and loyalty and relief from well-deserved
suffering from Assyrian rule to the
present}\label{ask-for-new-grace-and-loyalty-and-relief-from-well-deserved-suffering-from-assyrian-rule-to-the-present}}

\bibleverse{32} Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the
awesome God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness, don't let all the
travail seem little before you that has come on us, on our kings, on our
princes, on our priests, on our prophets, on our fathers, and on all
your people, since the time of the kings of Assyria to this day.
\bibleverse{33} However you are just in all that has come on us; for you
have dealt truly, but we have done wickedly. \bibleverse{34} Also our
kings, our princes, our priests, and our fathers have not kept your law,
nor listened to your commandments and your testimonies with which you
testified against them. \bibleverse{35} For they have not served you in
their kingdom, and in your great goodness that you gave them, and in the
large and rich land which you gave before them. They didn't turn from
their wicked works. \bibleverse{36} ``Behold, we are servants today, and
as for the land that you gave to our fathers to eat its fruit and its
good, behold, we are servants in it. \bibleverse{37} It yields much
increase to the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins.
Also they have power over our bodies and over our livestock, at their
pleasure, and we are in great distress. \bibleverse{38} Yet for all
this, we make a sure covenant, and write it; and our princes, our
Levites, and our priests, seal it.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{renovaciuxf3n-federal-mediante-contrato-escrito-y-firmado-de-los-jefes-especialmente-jefes-de-familia-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Renovación federal mediante contrato escrito y firmado de
los jefes (especialmente jefes de familia) del
pueblo}\label{renovaciuxf3n-federal-mediante-contrato-escrito-y-firmado-de-los-jefes-especialmente-jefes-de-familia-del-pueblo}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Los que sellaron fueron: Nehemías, el gobernador, hijo de
Hacalías, y Sedequías, \bibleverse{2} Seraías, Azarías, Jeremías,
\bibleverse{3} Pashur, Amarías, Malquías, \bibleverse{4} Hattush,
Sebanías, Malluch, \bibleverse{5} Harim, Meremot, Abdías, \bibleverse{6}
Daniel, Ginetón, Baruc, \bibleverse{7} Mesulam, Abías, Mijamín,
\bibleverse{8} Maazías, Bilgai y Semaías. Estos eran los sacerdotes.
\bibleverse{9} Los levitas: Jesúa hijo de Azanías, Binúi de los hijos de
Henadad, Cadmiel; \bibleverse{10} y sus hermanos, Sebanías, Hodías,
Kelita, Pelaías, Hanán, \bibleverse{11} Mica, Rehob, Hasabías,
\bibleverse{12} Zaccur, Serebías, Sebanías, \bibleverse{13} Hodías, Baní
y Beninú. \bibleverse{14} Los jefes del pueblo: Parosh, Pahathmoab,
Elam, Zattu, Bani, \footnote{\textbf{10:14} Esd 2,3; Esd 2,6}
\bibleverse{15} Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, \bibleverse{16} Adonías, Bigvai,
Adin, \bibleverse{17} Ater, Ezequías, Azzur, \bibleverse{18} Hodías,
Hashum, Bezai, \bibleverse{19} Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai, \bibleverse{20}
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, \bibleverse{21} Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
\bibleverse{22} Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, \bibleverse{23} Hoshea,
Hananiah, Hasshub, \bibleverse{24} Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
\bibleverse{25} Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, \bibleverse{26} Ahiah,
Hanan, Anan, \bibleverse{27} Malluch, Harim y Baanah.

\hypertarget{evitar-los-matrimonios-mixtos-y-no-tomar-el-suxe1bado}{%
\subsection{Evitar los matrimonios mixtos y no tomar el
sábado}\label{evitar-los-matrimonios-mixtos-y-no-tomar-el-suxe1bado}}

\bibleverse{28} El resto del pueblo, los sacerdotes, los levitas, los
porteros, los cantores, los servidores del templo, y todos los que se
habían apartado de los pueblos de las tierras a la ley de Dios, sus
esposas, sus hijos y sus hijas --- todos los que tenían conocimiento y
entendimiento --- \footnote{\textbf{10:28} Esd 2,70} \bibleverse{29} se
unieron a sus hermanos sus nobles, y entraron en una maldición y en un
juramento, para andar en la ley de Dios, que fue dada por Moisés el
siervo de Dios, y para observar y hacer todos los mandamientos de Yahvé
nuestro Señor, y sus ordenanzas y sus estatutos; \bibleverse{30} y que
no daríamos nuestras hijas a los pueblos de la tierra, ni tomaríamos sus
hijas para nuestros hijos; \bibleverse{31} y que si los pueblos de la
tierra trajeran mercancías o algún grano en el día de reposo para
vender, no les compraríamos en el día de reposo, ni en un día santo; y
que renunciaríamos a las cosechas del séptimo año y a la exacción de
toda deuda. \footnote{\textbf{10:31} Neh 13,15-16; Am 8,5}

\hypertarget{pago-oportuno-y-abundante-de-todos-los-deberes-y-obligaciones-relacionados-con-la-adoraciuxf3n-y-el-sacerdocio}{%
\subsection{Pago oportuno y abundante de todos los deberes y
obligaciones relacionados con la adoración y el
sacerdocio}\label{pago-oportuno-y-abundante-de-todos-los-deberes-y-obligaciones-relacionados-con-la-adoraciuxf3n-y-el-sacerdocio}}

\bibleverse{32} Además, nos hemos impuesto la obligación de cobrar
anualmente la tercera parte de un siclo para el servicio de la casa de
nuestro Dios: \bibleverse{33} para el pan de la proposición, para la
ofrenda continua, para el holocausto continuo, para los sábados, para
las lunas nuevas, para las fiestas, para las cosas santas, para las
ofrendas por el pecado para hacer expiación por Israel, y para toda la
obra de la casa de nuestro Dios. \bibleverse{34} Nosotros, los
sacerdotes, los levitas y el pueblo, echamos suertes sobre la ofrenda de
leña, para traerla a la casa de nuestro Dios, según las casas de
nuestros padres, en los tiempos señalados de año en año, para quemarla
en el altar de Yahvé nuestro Dios, como está escrito en la ley;
\footnote{\textbf{10:34} Lev 6,12} \bibleverse{35} y para traer las
primicias de nuestra tierra y las primicias de todos los frutos de toda
clase de árboles, de año en año, a la casa de Yahvé; \footnote{\textbf{10:35}
  Éxod 23,19} \bibleverse{36} también los primogénitos de nuestros hijos
y de nuestros ganados, como está escrito en la ley, y los primogénitos
de nuestras vacas y de nuestros rebaños, para llevarlos a la casa de
nuestro Dios, a los sacerdotes que sirven en la casa de nuestro Dios
\footnote{\textbf{10:36} Éxod 13,2} \bibleverse{37} y que traigamos las
primicias de nuestra masa, nuestras ofrendas de ondas, el fruto de toda
clase de árboles, el vino nuevo y el aceite, a los sacerdotes, a las
salas de la casa de nuestro Dios; y los diezmos de nuestra tierra a los
levitas; porque ellos, los levitas, toman los diezmos en todas nuestras
aldeas agrícolas. \footnote{\textbf{10:37} Núm 18,21} \bibleverse{38} El
sacerdote, descendiente de Aarón, estará con los levitas cuando éstos
tomen los diezmos. Los levitas llevarán el diezmo de los diezmos a la
casa de nuestro Dios, a las habitaciones, a la casa del tesoro.
\footnote{\textbf{10:38} Núm 18,26; Núm 18,28} \bibleverse{39} Porque
los hijos de Israel y los hijos de Leví llevarán la ofrenda mecida del
grano, del vino nuevo y del aceite, a las habitaciones donde están los
utensilios del santuario y los sacerdotes que ministran, con los
porteros y los cantores. No abandonaremos la casa de nuestro Dios.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{federal-renewal-through-written-and-signed-contract-of-the-heads-especially-heads-of-families-of-the-town}{%
\subsection{Federal renewal through written and signed contract of the
heads (especially heads of families) of the
town}\label{federal-renewal-through-written-and-signed-contract-of-the-heads-especially-heads-of-families-of-the-town}}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} Now those who sealed were: Nehemiah the governor, the son
of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah, \bibleverse{2} Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
\bibleverse{3} Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah, \bibleverse{4} Hattush,
Shebaniah, Malluch, \bibleverse{5} Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
\bibleverse{6} Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, \bibleverse{7} Meshullam,
Abijah, Mijamin, \bibleverse{8} Maaziah, Bilgai, and Shemaiah. These
were the priests. \bibleverse{9} The Levites: Jeshua the son of Azaniah,
Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel; \bibleverse{10} and their
brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, \bibleverse{11}
Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, \bibleverse{12} Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
\bibleverse{13} Hodiah, Bani, and Beninu. \bibleverse{14} The chiefs of
the people: Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zattu, Bani, \bibleverse{15}
Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, \bibleverse{16} Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
\bibleverse{17} Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur, \bibleverse{18} Hodiah, Hashum,
Bezai, \bibleverse{19} Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai, \bibleverse{20}
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, \bibleverse{21} Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
\bibleverse{22} Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, \bibleverse{23} Hoshea,
Hananiah, Hasshub, \bibleverse{24} Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
\bibleverse{25} Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, \bibleverse{26} Ahiah,
Hanan, Anan, \bibleverse{27} Malluch, Harim, and Baanah.

\hypertarget{avoid-mixed-marriages-and-not-drink-on-the-sabbath}{%
\subsection{Avoid mixed marriages and not drink on the
Sabbath}\label{avoid-mixed-marriages-and-not-drink-on-the-sabbath}}

\bibleverse{28} The rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the
gatekeepers, the singers, the temple servants, and all those who had
separated themselves from the peoples of the lands to the law of God,
their wives, their sons, and their daughters---everyone who had
knowledge and understanding--- \bibleverse{29} joined with their
brothers, their nobles, and entered into a curse and into an oath, to
walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to
observe and do all the commandments of Yahweh our Lord, and his
ordinances and his statutes; \bibleverse{30} and that we would not give
our daughters to the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for
our sons; \bibleverse{31} and if the peoples of the land bring wares or
any grain on the Sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy from them on
the Sabbath, or on a holy day; and that we would forego the seventh year
crops and the exaction of every debt.

\hypertarget{timely-and-abundant-payment-of-all-duties-and-obligations-related-to-worship-and-the-priesthood}{%
\subsection{Timely and abundant payment of all duties and obligations
related to worship and the
priesthood}\label{timely-and-abundant-payment-of-all-duties-and-obligations-related-to-worship-and-the-priesthood}}

\bibleverse{32} Also we made ordinances for ourselves, to charge
ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel\footnote{\textbf{10:32}
  A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.} for the service of
the house of our God: \bibleverse{33} for the show bread, for the
continual meal offering, for the continual burnt offering, for the
Sabbaths, for the new moons, for the set feasts, for the holy things,
for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work
of the house of our God. \bibleverse{34} We, the priests, the Levites,
and the people, cast lots for the wood offering, to bring it into the
house of our God, according to our fathers' houses, at times appointed
year by year, to burn on Yahweh our God's altar, as it is written in the
law; \bibleverse{35} and to bring the first fruits of our ground and the
first fruits of all fruit of all kinds of trees, year by year, to
Yahweh's house; \bibleverse{36} also the firstborn of our sons and of
our livestock, as it is written in the law, and the firstborn of our
herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, to the
priests who minister in the house of our God; \bibleverse{37} and that
we should bring the first fruits of our dough, our wave offerings, the
fruit of all kinds of trees, and the new wine and the oil, to the
priests, to the rooms of the house of our God; and the tithes of our
ground to the Levites; for they, the Levites, take the tithes in all our
farming villages. \bibleverse{38} The priest, the descendent of Aaron,
shall be with the Levites when the Levites take tithes. The Levites
shall bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the
rooms, into the treasure house. \bibleverse{39} For the children of
Israel and the children of Levi shall bring the wave offering of the
grain, of the new wine, and of the oil, to the rooms where the vessels
of the sanctuary are, and the priests who minister, with the gatekeepers
and the singers. We will not forsake the house of our God.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{una-duxe9cima-parte-de-la-poblaciuxf3n-rural-estuxe1-determinada-por-sorteo-a-mudarse-a-jerusaluxe9n}{%
\subsection{Una décima parte de la población rural está determinada por
sorteo a mudarse a
Jerusalén}\label{una-duxe9cima-parte-de-la-poblaciuxf3n-rural-estuxe1-determinada-por-sorteo-a-mudarse-a-jerusaluxe9n}}

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Los príncipes del pueblo vivían en Jerusalén. El resto
del pueblo también echó suertes para que uno de los diez habitara en
Jerusalén, la ciudad santa, y nueve partes en las demás ciudades.
\footnote{\textbf{11:1} Neh 7,5} \bibleverse{2} El pueblo bendijo a
todos los hombres que se ofrecieron voluntariamente para habitar en
Jerusalén.

\hypertarget{listas-de-los-jefes-de-los-juduxedos-y-benjaminitas-que-vivuxedan-en-jerusaluxe9n-incluidos-sacerdotes-porteros-etc.}{%
\subsection{Listas de los jefes de los judíos y benjaminitas que vivían
en Jerusalén (incluidos sacerdotes, porteros,
etc.)}\label{listas-de-los-jefes-de-los-juduxedos-y-benjaminitas-que-vivuxedan-en-jerusaluxe9n-incluidos-sacerdotes-porteros-etc.}}

\bibleverse{3} Estos son los jefes de la provincia que vivían en
Jerusalén; pero en las ciudades de Judá, cada uno vivía en su posesión
en sus ciudades: los sacerdotes, los levitas, los servidores del templo
y los hijos de los servidores de Salomón. \footnote{\textbf{11:3} Neh
  7,57; 1Cró 9,2-17} \bibleverse{4} Algunos de los hijos de Judá y de
los hijos de Benjamín vivían en Jerusalén. De los hijos de Judá Ataías
hijo de Uzías, hijo de Zacarías, hijo de Amarías, hijo de Sefatías, hijo
de Mahalalel, de los hijos de Pérez; \bibleverse{5} y Maasías hijo de
Baruc, hijo de Colhoze, hijo de Hazaías, hijo de Adaías, hijo de
Joiarib, hijo de Zacarías, hijo del silonita. \bibleverse{6} Todos los
hijos de Pérez que vivían en Jerusalén eran cuatrocientos sesenta y ocho
hombres valientes.

\bibleverse{7} Estos son los hijos de Benjamín: Salú, hijo de Mesulam,
hijo de Joed, hijo de Pedaías, hijo de Colaías, hijo de Maasías, hijo de
Itiel, hijo de Jesaías. \bibleverse{8} Después de él, Gabbai y Sallai,
novecientos veintiocho. \bibleverse{9} Joel hijo de Zicri era su
supervisor; y Judá hijo de Hasenúa era el segundo sobre la ciudad.

\bibleverse{10} De los sacerdotes: Jedaías hijo de Joiarib, Jacín,
\bibleverse{11} Seraías hijo de Hilcías, hijo de Mesulam, hijo de Sadoc,
hijo de Meraiot, hijo de Ahitub, jefe de la casa de Dios,
\bibleverse{12} y sus hermanos que hacían la obra de la casa,
ochocientos veintidós; y Adaías hijo de Jeroham, hijo de Pelalías, hijo
de Amzi, hijo de Zacarías, hijo de Pashur, hijo de Malquías,
\bibleverse{13} y sus hermanos, jefes de las casas paternas, doscientos
cuarenta y dos y Amashsai hijo de Azarel, hijo de Ahzai, hijo de
Meshillemoth, hijo de Immer, \bibleverse{14} y sus hermanos, hombres
valientes, ciento veintiocho; y su jefe era Zabdiel, hijo de Haggedolim.

\bibleverse{15} De los levitas Semaías hijo de Hasub, hijo de Azricam,
hijo de Hasabías, hijo de Bunni; \bibleverse{16} y Sabetai y Jozabad, de
los jefes de los levitas, que tenían a su cargo los asuntos externos de
la casa de Dios; \bibleverse{17} y Matanías hijo de Mica, hijo de Zabdi,
hijo de Asaf, que era el jefe que iniciaba la acción de gracias en la
oración, y Bacbuquías, el segundo entre sus hermanos; y Abda hijo de
Sammúa, hijo de Galal, hijo de Jedutún. \bibleverse{18} Todos los
levitas de la ciudad santa eran doscientos ochenta y cuatro.

\bibleverse{19} Además, los guardianes de las puertas, Acub, Talmón y
sus hermanos, que vigilaban las puertas, eran ciento setenta y dos.
\bibleverse{20} El resto de Israel, de los sacerdotes y de los levitas,
estaban en todas las ciudades de Judá, cada uno en su heredad.
\bibleverse{21} Pero los servidores del templo vivían en Ofel, y Ziha y
Gishpa estaban al frente de los servidores del templo.

\bibleverse{22} El supervisor de los levitas en Jerusalén era Uzi hijo
de Bani, hijo de Hasabías, hijo de Matanías, hijo de Mica, de los hijos
de Asaf, los cantores, estaba a cargo de los asuntos de la casa de Dios.
\bibleverse{23} Porque había un mandamiento del rey acerca de ellos, y
una provisión establecida para los cantores, como cada día lo requería.
\bibleverse{24} Petaías, hijo de Meshezabel, de los hijos de Zera, hijo
de Judá, estaba al lado del rey en todos los asuntos del pueblo.

\hypertarget{lista-de-lugares-que-luego-fueron-poblados-por-juduxedos-benjaminitas-y-levitas}{%
\subsection{Lista de lugares que luego fueron poblados por judíos,
benjaminitas y
levitas}\label{lista-de-lugares-que-luego-fueron-poblados-por-juduxedos-benjaminitas-y-levitas}}

\bibleverse{25} En cuanto a las aldeas con sus campos, algunos de los
hijos de Judá vivían en Quiriat Arba y sus pueblos, en Dibón y sus
pueblos, en Jekabzeel y sus aldeas, \footnote{\textbf{11:25} Jos 20,7;
  Jos 21,11} \bibleverse{26} en Jesúa, en Moladah, Bet Pelet,
\bibleverse{27} en Hazar Shual en Beersheba y sus aldeas,
\bibleverse{28} en Ziklag, en Meconah y sus aldeas, \footnote{\textbf{11:28}
  Jos 15,31} \bibleverse{29} en En Rimmon, en Zorah, en Jarmuth,
\bibleverse{30} Zanoah, Adullam y sus aldeas, Lachish y sus campos, y
Azekah y sus aldeas. Y acamparon desde Beerseba hasta el valle de Hinom.
\bibleverse{31} Los hijos de Benjamín también vivían desde Geba, en
Micmas y Aija, y en Betel y sus pueblos, \footnote{\textbf{11:31} Jos
  18,22} \bibleverse{32} en Anatot, Nob, Ananías, \bibleverse{33} Hazor,
Ramá, Gittaim, \bibleverse{34} Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, \bibleverse{35}
Lod y Ono, el valle de los artesanos. \bibleverse{36} De los levitas,
ciertas divisiones de Judá se establecieron en el territorio de
Benjamín.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{a-tenth-of-the-rural-population-is-determined-by-lot-to-move-to-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{A tenth of the rural population is determined by lot to move
to
Jerusalem}\label{a-tenth-of-the-rural-population-is-determined-by-lot-to-move-to-jerusalem}}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} The princes of the people lived in Jerusalem. The rest of
the people also cast lots to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem, the
holy city, and nine parts in the other cities. \bibleverse{2} The people
blessed all the men who willingly offered themselves to dwell in
Jerusalem.

\hypertarget{lists-of-the-heads-of-the-jews-and-benjaminites-who-lived-in-jerusalem-including-priests-gatekeepers-etc.}{%
\subsection{Lists of the heads of the Jews and Benjaminites who lived in
Jerusalem (including priests, gatekeepers,
etc.)}\label{lists-of-the-heads-of-the-jews-and-benjaminites-who-lived-in-jerusalem-including-priests-gatekeepers-etc.}}

\bibleverse{3} Now these are the chiefs of the province who lived in
Jerusalem; but in the cities of Judah, everyone lived in his possession
in their cities---Israel, the priests, the Levites, the temple servants,
and the children of Solomon's servants. \bibleverse{4} Some of the
children of Judah and of the children of Benjamin lived in Jerusalem. Of
the children of Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah,
the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the
children of Perez; \bibleverse{5} and Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the
son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of
Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite. \bibleverse{6}
All the sons of Perez who lived in Jerusalem were four hundred
sixty-eight valiant men. \bibleverse{7} These are the sons of Benjamin:
Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son
of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.
\bibleverse{8} After him Gabbai and Sallai, nine hundred twenty-eight.
\bibleverse{9} Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer; and Judah the
son of Hassenuah was second over the city. \bibleverse{10} Of the
priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin, \bibleverse{11} Seraiah the
son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of
Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of God's house, \bibleverse{12}
and their brothers who did the work of the house, eight hundred
twenty-two; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son
of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,
\bibleverse{13} and his brothers, chiefs of fathers' households, two
hundred forty-two; and Amashsai the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the
son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer, \bibleverse{14} and their
brothers, mighty men of valor, one hundred twenty-eight; and their
overseer was Zabdiel, the son of Haggedolim. \bibleverse{15} Of the
Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of
Hashabiah, the son of Bunni; \bibleverse{16} and Shabbethai and Jozabad,
of the chiefs of the Levites, who had the oversight of the outward
business of God's house; \bibleverse{17} and Mattaniah the son of Mica,
the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the chief to begin the
thanksgiving in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second among his brothers;
and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
\bibleverse{18} All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred
eighty-four. \bibleverse{19} Moreover the gatekeepers, Akkub, Talmon,
and their brothers, who kept watch at the gates, were one hundred
seventy-two. \bibleverse{20} The residue of Israel, of the priests, and
the Levites were in all the cities of Judah, everyone in his
inheritance. \bibleverse{21} But the temple servants lived in Ophel; and
Ziha and Gishpa were over the temple servants. \bibleverse{22} The
overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the
son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of
Asaph, the singers, was over the business of God's house.
\bibleverse{23} For there was a commandment from the king concerning
them, and a settled provision for the singers, as every day required.
\bibleverse{24} Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the children of
Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning
the people.

\hypertarget{list-of-places-later-settled-by-jews-benjaminites-and-levites}{%
\subsection{List of places later settled by Jews, Benjaminites, and
Levites}\label{list-of-places-later-settled-by-jews-benjaminites-and-levites}}

\bibleverse{25} As for the villages with their fields, some of the
children of Judah lived in Kiriath Arba and its towns, in Dibon and its
towns, in Jekabzeel and its villages, \bibleverse{26} in Jeshua, in
Moladah, Beth Pelet, \bibleverse{27} in Hazar Shual, in Beersheba and
its towns, \bibleverse{28} in Ziklag, in Meconah and in its towns,
\bibleverse{29} in En Rimmon, in Zorah, in Jarmuth, \bibleverse{30}
Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and its fields, and Azekah
and its towns. So they encamped from Beersheba to the valley of Hinnom.
\bibleverse{31} The children of Benjamin also lived from Geba onward, at
Michmash and Aija, and at Bethel and its towns, \bibleverse{32} at
Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, \bibleverse{33} Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
\bibleverse{34} Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, \bibleverse{35} Lod, and Ono,
the valley of craftsmen. \bibleverse{36} Of the Levites, certain
divisions in Judah settled in Benjamin's territory.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{clases-de-sacerdotes-y-levitas-que-regresaron-con-zorobabel-y-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Clases de sacerdotes y levitas que regresaron con Zorobabel
y
Jesús}\label{clases-de-sacerdotes-y-levitas-que-regresaron-con-zorobabel-y-jesuxfas}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Estos son los sacerdotes y levitas que subieron con
Zorobabel, hijo de Salatiel, y con Jesúa: Seraías, Jeremías, Esdras,
\footnote{\textbf{12:1} Esd 2,2} \bibleverse{2} Amarías, Malluch,
Hattush, \bibleverse{3} Secanías, Rehum, Meremot, \bibleverse{4} Iddo,
Ginnethoi, Abías, \footnote{\textbf{12:4} Luc 1,5} \bibleverse{5}
Mijamín, Maadia, Bilgah, \bibleverse{6} Semaías, Joiarib, Jedaías,
\bibleverse{7} Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah y Jedaías. Estos eran los jefes de
los sacerdotes y de sus hermanos en los días de Jesúa.

\bibleverse{8} Además, los levitas eran Jesúa, Binúi, Cadmiel, Serebías,
Judá y Matanías, que estaba a cargo de los cantos de acción de gracias,
él y sus hermanos. \footnote{\textbf{12:8} Neh 11,17} \bibleverse{9}
También Bakbucías y Unno, sus hermanos, estaban cerca de ellos según sus
cargos.

\hypertarget{la-luxednea-de-sumo-sacerdote}{%
\subsection{La línea de sumo
sacerdote}\label{la-luxednea-de-sumo-sacerdote}}

\bibleverse{10} Jesúa fue padre de Joiaquim, y Joiaquim fue padre de
Eliasib, y Eliasib fue padre de Joiada, \footnote{\textbf{12:10} Neh
  12,1; Neh 12,26; Neh 3,1; Neh 3,20} \bibleverse{11} y Joiada fue padre
de Jonatán, y Jonatán fue padre de Jaddua.

\hypertarget{jefes-de-familia-sacerdotal-desde-la-uxe9poca-del-sumo-sacerdote-joiacim}{%
\subsection{Jefes de familia sacerdotal desde la época del sumo
sacerdote
Joiacim}\label{jefes-de-familia-sacerdotal-desde-la-uxe9poca-del-sumo-sacerdote-joiacim}}

\bibleverse{12} En los días de Joiakim había sacerdotes, jefes de
familia de los padres: de Seraías, Meraías; de Jeremías, Hananías;
\bibleverse{13} de Esdras, Mesulam; de Amarías, Johanán; \bibleverse{14}
de Malluchi, Jonatán; de Sebanías, José; \bibleverse{15} de Harim, Adna;
de Meraiot, Helkai; \bibleverse{16} de Iddo, Zacarías; de Ginetón,
Mesulam; \bibleverse{17} de Abías, Zicri; de Miniamin, de Moadías,
Piltai; \bibleverse{18} de Bilgah, Sammua; de Semaías, Jonatán;
\bibleverse{19} de Joiarib, Mattenai; de Jedaías, Uzzi; \bibleverse{20}
de Sallai, Kallai; de Amok, Eber; \bibleverse{21} de Hilcías, Hasabías;
de Jedaías, Netanel.

\hypertarget{lista-de-los-levitas-hasta-la-uxe9poca-del-sumo-sacerdote-johanuxe1n}{%
\subsection{Lista de los levitas hasta la época del sumo sacerdote
Johanán}\label{lista-de-los-levitas-hasta-la-uxe9poca-del-sumo-sacerdote-johanuxe1n}}

\bibleverse{22} En cuanto a los levitas, en los días de Eliasib, Joiada,
Johanán y Jaddua, se registraron los jefes de familia; también los
sacerdotes, en el reinado de Darío el Persa. \footnote{\textbf{12:22}
  Neh 12,10-11} \bibleverse{23} Los hijos de Leví, jefes de familia,
fueron inscritos en el libro de las crónicas, hasta los días de Johanán
hijo de Eliasib. \bibleverse{24} Los jefes de los levitas: Hasabías,
Serebías y Jesúa hijo de Cadmiel, con sus hermanos cerca de ellos, para
alabar y dar gracias según el mandato de David, el hombre de Dios,
sección tras sección. \footnote{\textbf{12:24} 1Cró 25,1; 2Cró 29,25}
\bibleverse{25} Matanías, Bacbuquías, Abdías, Mesulam, Talmón y Acub
eran guardianes de las puertas, que vigilaban los almacenes de las
puertas. \footnote{\textbf{12:25} Neh 11,17; Neh 11,19; 2Cró 8,14; 1Cró
  26,15; 1Cró 26,17} \bibleverse{26} Estos eran en los días de Joiaquim
hijo de Jesúa, hijo de Josadac, y en los días del gobernador Nehemías y
del sacerdote y escriba Esdras. \footnote{\textbf{12:26} Neh 12,10; 1Cró
  6,14-15; Neh 5,14; Esd 7,1-6}

\hypertarget{inauguraciuxf3n-de-la-muralla-de-la-ciudad}{%
\subsection{Inauguración de la muralla de la
ciudad}\label{inauguraciuxf3n-de-la-muralla-de-la-ciudad}}

\bibleverse{27} En la dedicación del muro de Jerusalén, buscaron a los
levitas de todos sus lugares para traerlos a Jerusalén a celebrar la
dedicación con alegría, dando gracias y cantando, con címbalos,
instrumentos de cuerda y arpas. \bibleverse{28} Los hijos de los
cantores se reunieron, tanto de la llanura que rodea a Jerusalén como de
las aldeas de los netofatitas; \bibleverse{29} también de Bet Gilgal y
de los campos de Geba y Azmavet, porque los cantores se habían
construido aldeas alrededor de Jerusalén. \bibleverse{30} Los sacerdotes
y los levitas se purificaron, y purificaron el pueblo, las puertas y el
muro.

\bibleverse{31} Entonces hice subir a los príncipes de Judá al muro, y
designé dos grandes compañías que dieron gracias y fueron en procesión.
Una iba a la derecha en el muro, hacia la puerta del estiércol;
\footnote{\textbf{12:31} Neh 2,13; Neh 3,13} \bibleverse{32} y tras
ellos iban Oseas, con la mitad de los príncipes de Judá, \bibleverse{33}
y Azarías, Esdras y Mesulam, \bibleverse{34} Judá, Benjamín, Semaías,
Jeremías, \bibleverse{35} y algunos de los hijos de los sacerdotes con
trompetas: Zacarías hijo de Jonatán, hijo de Semaías, hijo de Matanías,
hijo de Micaías, hijo de Zacur, hijo de Asaf; \bibleverse{36} y sus
hermanos, Semaías, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Netanel, Judá y
Hanani, con los instrumentos musicales de David, el hombre de Dios; y el
escriba Esdras estaba delante de ellos. \bibleverse{37} Por la puerta
del manantial, y en línea recta delante de ellos, subieron por las
escaleras de la ciudad de David, en la subida del muro, por encima de la
casa de David, hasta la puerta de las aguas, hacia el este. \footnote{\textbf{12:37}
  Neh 3,26}

\bibleverse{38} La otra compañía de los que daban gracias salió a su
encuentro, y yo tras ellos, con la mitad del pueblo en el muro, por
encima de la torre de los hornos, hasta el muro ancho, \footnote{\textbf{12:38}
  Neh 3,11} \bibleverse{39} y por encima de la puerta de Efraín, y por
la puerta vieja, y por la puerta del pescado, la torre de Hananel, y la
torre de Hammea, hasta la puerta de las ovejas; y se detuvieron en la
puerta de la guardia. \bibleverse{40} Las dos compañías de los que daban
gracias en la casa de Dios estaban en pie, y yo y la mitad de los jefes
conmigo; \bibleverse{41} y los sacerdotes, Eliaquim, Maasías, Miniamin,
Micaías, Elioenai, Zacarías y Hananías, con trompetas; \bibleverse{42} y
Maasías, Semaías, Eleazar, Uzi, Johanán, Malquías, Elam y Ezer. Los
cantores cantaban en voz alta, con Jezrahías, su supervisor.
\bibleverse{43} Aquel día ofrecieron grandes sacrificios y se
regocijaron, porque Dios los había hecho gozar con gran alegría; y
también se regocijaron las mujeres y los niños, de modo que la alegría
de Jerusalén se oyó hasta muy lejos.

\hypertarget{empleo-de-funcionarios-para-supervisar-los-ingresos-de-los-sacerdotes-y-levitas}{%
\subsection{Empleo de funcionarios para supervisar los ingresos de los
sacerdotes y
levitas}\label{empleo-de-funcionarios-para-supervisar-los-ingresos-de-los-sacerdotes-y-levitas}}

\bibleverse{44} Aquel día se designaron hombres sobre las salas para los
tesoros, para las ofrendas de las olas, para las primicias y para los
diezmos, a fin de recoger en ellas, según los campos de las ciudades,
las porciones señaladas por la ley para los sacerdotes y los levitas;
porque Judá se alegró por los sacerdotes y por los levitas que servían.
\footnote{\textbf{12:44} Neh 10,36; Neh 13,5} \bibleverse{45} Ellos
cumplían el deber de su Dios y el deber de la purificación, y lo mismo
hacían los cantores y los porteros, según el mandato de David y de
Salomón su hijo. \bibleverse{46} Porque en los días de David y de Asaf
de antaño había un jefe de los cantores, y cantos de alabanza y de
acción de gracias a Dios. \footnote{\textbf{12:46} 1Cró 25,1}
\bibleverse{47} Todo Israel, en los días de Zorobabel y en los días de
Nehemías, dio las porciones de los cantores y de los porteros, según
cada día; y apartaron lo que era para los levitas; y los levitas
apartaron lo que era para los hijos de Aarón. \footnote{\textbf{12:47}
  Neh 10,38}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{classes-of-priests-and-levites-who-returned-with-zerubbabel-and-jesus}{%
\subsection{Classes of priests and Levites who returned with Zerubbabel
and
Jesus}\label{classes-of-priests-and-levites-who-returned-with-zerubbabel-and-jesus}}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Now these are the priests and the Levites who went up
with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah,
Ezra, \bibleverse{2} Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, \bibleverse{3}
Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, \bibleverse{4} Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,
\bibleverse{5} Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, \bibleverse{6} Shemaiah,
Joiarib, Jedaiah, \bibleverse{7} Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah.
These were the chiefs of the priests and of their brothers in the days
of Jeshua. \bibleverse{8} Moreover the Levites were Jeshua, Binnui,
Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who was over the thanksgiving
songs, he and his brothers. \bibleverse{9} Also Bakbukiah and Unno,
their brothers, were close to them according to their offices.

\hypertarget{the-high-priest-line}{%
\subsection{The high priest line}\label{the-high-priest-line}}

\bibleverse{10} Jeshua became the father of Joiakim, and Joiakim became
the father of Eliashib, and Eliashib became the father of Joiada,
\bibleverse{11} and Joiada became the father of Jonathan, and Jonathan
became the father of Jaddua.

\hypertarget{heads-of-priestly-families-since-the-time-of-high-priest-jehoiakim}{%
\subsection{Heads of priestly families since the time of High Priest
Jehoiakim}\label{heads-of-priestly-families-since-the-time-of-high-priest-jehoiakim}}

\bibleverse{12} In the days of Joiakim were priests, heads of fathers'
households: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah; \bibleverse{13}
of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan; \bibleverse{14} of Malluchi,
Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph; \bibleverse{15} of Harim, Adna; of
Meraioth, Helkai; \bibleverse{16} of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon,
Meshullam; \bibleverse{17} of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah,
Piltai; \bibleverse{18} of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
\bibleverse{19} of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi; \bibleverse{20}
of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber; \bibleverse{21} of Hilkiah, Hashabiah;
of Jedaiah, Nethanel.

\hypertarget{list-of-levites-up-to-the-time-of-high-priest-johanan}{%
\subsection{List of Levites up to the time of High Priest
Johanan}\label{list-of-levites-up-to-the-time-of-high-priest-johanan}}

\bibleverse{22} As for the Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada,
Johanan, and Jaddua, there were recorded the heads of fathers'
households; also the priests, in the reign of Darius the Persian.
\bibleverse{23} The sons of Levi, heads of fathers' households, were
written in the book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan
the son of Eliashib. \bibleverse{24} The chiefs of the Levites:
Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brothers
close to them, to praise and give thanks according to the commandment of
David the man of God, section next to section. \bibleverse{25}
Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were
gatekeepers keeping the watch at the storehouses of the gates.
\bibleverse{26} These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the
son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra
the priest and scribe.

\hypertarget{inauguration-of-the-city-wall}{%
\subsection{Inauguration of the city
wall}\label{inauguration-of-the-city-wall}}

\bibleverse{27} At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought
the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem to keep
the dedication with gladness, both with giving thanks and with singing,
with cymbals, stringed instruments, and with harps. \bibleverse{28} The
sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain
around Jerusalem and from the villages of the Netophathites;
\bibleverse{29} also from Beth Gilgal and out of the fields of Geba and
Azmaveth, for the singers had built themselves villages around
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{30} The priests and the Levites purified
themselves; and they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.
\bibleverse{31} Then I brought the princes of Judah up on the wall, and
appointed two great companies who gave thanks and went in procession.
One went on the right hand on the wall toward the dung gate;
\bibleverse{32} and after them went Hoshaiah, with half of the princes
of Judah, \bibleverse{33} and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,
\bibleverse{34} Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, Jeremiah, \bibleverse{35} and
some of the priests' sons with trumpets: Zechariah the son of Jonathan,
the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son
of Zaccur, the son of Asaph; \bibleverse{36} and his brothers, Shemaiah,
Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, with the
musical instruments of David the man of God; and Ezra the scribe was
before them. \bibleverse{37} By the spring gate, and straight before
them, they went up by the stairs of David's city, at the ascent of the
wall, above David's house, even to the water gate eastward.
\bibleverse{38} The other company of those who gave thanks went to meet
them, and I after them, with the half of the people on the wall above
the tower of the furnaces, even to the wide wall, \bibleverse{39} and
above the gate of Ephraim, and by the old gate, and by the fish gate,
the tower of Hananel, and the tower of Hammeah, even to the sheep gate;
and they stood still in the gate of the guard. \bibleverse{40} So the
two companies of those who gave thanks in God's house stood, and I and
the half of the rulers with me; \bibleverse{41} and the priests,
Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah,
with trumpets; \bibleverse{42} and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi,
Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. The singers sang loud, with
Jezrahiah their overseer. \bibleverse{43} They offered great sacrifices
that day, and rejoiced, for God had made them rejoice with great joy;
and the women and the children also rejoiced, so that the joy of
Jerusalem was heard even far away.

\hypertarget{employment-of-officials-to-supervise-the-income-of-the-priests-and-levites}{%
\subsection{Employment of officials to supervise the income of the
priests and
Levites}\label{employment-of-officials-to-supervise-the-income-of-the-priests-and-levites}}

\bibleverse{44} On that day, men were appointed over the rooms for the
treasures, for the wave offerings, for the first fruits, and for the
tithes, to gather into them according to the fields of the cities the
portions appointed by the law for the priests and Levites; for Judah
rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites who served. \bibleverse{45}
They performed the duty of their God and the duty of the purification,
and so did the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the commandment
of David and of Solomon his son. \bibleverse{46} For in the days of
David and Asaph of old there was a chief of the singers, and songs of
praise and thanksgiving to God. \bibleverse{47} All Israel in the days
of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah gave the portions of the
singers and the gatekeepers, as every day required; and they set apart
that which was for the Levites; and the Levites set apart that which was
for the sons of Aaron.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{eliminaciuxf3n-de-los-componentes-paganos-especialmente-amonitas-y-moabitas-de-la-comunidad}{%
\subsection{Eliminación de los componentes paganos (especialmente
amonitas y moabitas) de la
comunidad}\label{eliminaciuxf3n-de-los-componentes-paganos-especialmente-amonitas-y-moabitas-de-la-comunidad}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{13}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Aquel día leyeron en el libro de Moisés a oídos del
pueblo, y se encontró escrito en él que un amonita y un moabita no
debían entrar en la asamblea de Dios para siempre, \footnote{\textbf{13:1}
  Deut 23,3-5} \bibleverse{2} porque no salieron al encuentro de los
hijos de Israel con pan y agua, sino que contrataron a Balaam contra
ellos para maldecirlos; sin embargo, nuestro Dios convirtió la maldición
en bendición. \footnote{\textbf{13:2} Núm 22,5-6} \bibleverse{3} Sucedió
que cuando escucharon la ley, separaron de Israel a toda la multitud
mixta.

\hypertarget{eliminaciuxf3n-de-la-celda-de-tobija-en-el-templo}{%
\subsection{Eliminación de la celda de Tobija en el
templo}\label{eliminaciuxf3n-de-la-celda-de-tobija-en-el-templo}}

\bibleverse{4} Antes de esto, el sacerdote Eliasib, que había sido
designado como encargado de las habitaciones de la casa de nuestro Dios,
siendo aliado de Tobías, \bibleverse{5} había preparado para él una gran
sala, en la que antes se depositaban las ofrendas de comida, el
incienso, los vasos y los diezmos del grano, el vino nuevo y el aceite,
que se daban por mandato a los levitas, a los cantores y a los porteros;
y las ofrendas onduladas para los sacerdotes. \bibleverse{6} Pero en
todo esto no estuve en Jerusalén, porque en el año treinta y dos de
Artajerjes, rey de Babilonia, fui al rey; y después de algunos días pedí
permiso al rey, \bibleverse{7} y llegué a Jerusalén, y comprendí el mal
que Eliasib había hecho a Tobías, al prepararle una habitación en los
atrios de la casa de Dios. \bibleverse{8} Esto me afligió mucho. Por eso
eché de la habitación todos los enseres de Tobías. \bibleverse{9} Luego
ordené, y ellos limpiaron las habitaciones. Llevé a ellas los utensilios
de la casa de Dios, con las ofrendas de comida y el incienso de nuevo.
\footnote{\textbf{13:9} Neh 10,39}

\hypertarget{asegurar-la-correcta-entrega-de-los-tributos-a-los-levitas}{%
\subsection{Asegurar la correcta entrega de los tributos a los
levitas}\label{asegurar-la-correcta-entrega-de-los-tributos-a-los-levitas}}

\bibleverse{10} Me di cuenta de que las porciones de los levitas no se
les habían dado, de modo que los levitas y los cantores, que hacían el
trabajo, habían huido cada uno a su campo. \bibleverse{11} Entonces
discutí con los jefes y dije: ``¿Por qué está abandonada la casa de
Dios?'' Los reuní y los puse en su lugar. \footnote{\textbf{13:11} Neh
  10,39} \bibleverse{12} Entonces todo Judá trajo el diezmo del grano,
del vino nuevo y del aceite a las arcas. \footnote{\textbf{13:12} Núm
  18,21} \bibleverse{13} Puse como tesoreros sobre los tesoros al
sacerdote Selemías y al escriba Sadoc, y de los levitas a Pedaías; y
junto a ellos a Hanán hijo de Zaccur, hijo de Matanías; porque eran
tenidos por fieles, y su oficio era repartir a sus hermanos.

\bibleverse{14} Acuérdate de mí, Dios mío, en cuanto a esto, y no borres
mis buenas obras que he hecho por la casa de mi Dios y por sus
celebraciones. \footnote{\textbf{13:14} Neh 13,31; Neh 5,19}

\hypertarget{eliminar-la-profanaciuxf3n-del-suxe1bado-por-parte-de-empresarios-y-comerciantes}{%
\subsection{Eliminar la profanación del sábado por parte de empresarios
y
comerciantes}\label{eliminar-la-profanaciuxf3n-del-suxe1bado-por-parte-de-empresarios-y-comerciantes}}

\bibleverse{15} En aquellos días vi a algunos hombres que pisaban
lagares en sábado en Judá, que traían gavillas y cargaban asnos con
vino, uvas, higos y toda clase de cargas que llevaban a Jerusalén en día
de reposo; y testifiqué contra ellos en el día en que vendían alimentos.
\footnote{\textbf{13:15} Neh 10,31; Jer 17,21-27} \bibleverse{16}
También vivían allí algunos hombres de Tiro, que traían pescado y toda
clase de mercancías, y vendían en sábado a los hijos de Judá y en
Jerusalén. \bibleverse{17} Entonces discutí con los nobles de Judá y les
dije: ``¿Qué maldad es ésta que hacéis, profanando el día de reposo?
\bibleverse{18} ¿No hicieron esto vuestros padres, y no trajo nuestro
Dios todo este mal sobre nosotros y sobre esta ciudad? Sin embargo,
vosotros traéis más ira sobre Israel al profanar el sábado''.

\bibleverse{19} Sucedió que cuando las puertas de Jerusalén comenzaron a
oscurecerse antes del sábado, mandé cerrar las puertas y ordené que no
se abrieran hasta después del sábado. Puse a algunos de mis siervos a
cargo de las puertas, para que no se introdujera ninguna carga en el día
de reposo. \bibleverse{20} Entonces los mercaderes y vendedores de toda
clase de mercancías acamparon fuera de Jerusalén una o dos veces.
\bibleverse{21} Entonces yo testifiqué contra ellos y les dije: ``¿Por
qué os quedáis alrededor del muro? Si volvéis a hacerlo, os echaré
mano''. Desde entonces, no vinieron en sábado. \bibleverse{22} Mandé a
los levitas que se purificaran, y que vinieran a guardar las puertas,
para santificar el día de reposo. Acuérdate de mí también por esto, Dios
mío, y perdóname según la grandeza de tu amorosa bondad. \footnote{\textbf{13:22}
  Neh 13,14}

\hypertarget{medidas-contra-los-matrimonios-mixtos-rechazo-del-hijo-de-un-sumo-sacerdote}{%
\subsection{Medidas contra los matrimonios mixtos; Rechazo del hijo de
un sumo
sacerdote}\label{medidas-contra-los-matrimonios-mixtos-rechazo-del-hijo-de-un-sumo-sacerdote}}

\bibleverse{23} En aquellos días vi también a los judíos que se habían
casado con mujeres de Asdod, de Amón y de Moab; \bibleverse{24} y sus
hijos hablaban la mitad en el idioma de Asdod, y no podían hablar en la
lengua de los judíos, sino según la lengua de cada pueblo.
\bibleverse{25} Yo discutí con ellos, los maldije, golpeé a algunos de
ellos, les arranqué el cabello y les hice jurar por Dios: ``No daréis
vuestras hijas a sus hijos, ni tomaréis sus hijas para vuestros hijos,
ni para vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{13:25} Deut 7,3} \bibleverse{26} ¿No
pecó Salomón, rey de Israel, con estas cosas? Sin embargo, entre muchas
naciones no hubo un rey como él, y fue amado por su Dios, y Dios lo hizo
rey de todo Israel. Sin embargo, las mujeres extranjeras lo hicieron
pecar. \footnote{\textbf{13:26} 1Re 11,3-8} \bibleverse{27} ¿Debemos,
pues, escucharte para hacer todo este gran mal, para transgredir a
nuestro Dios casándonos con mujeres extranjeras?''

\bibleverse{28} Uno de los hijos de Joiada, hijo del sumo sacerdote
Eliasib, era yerno de Sanbalat el horonita; por eso lo eché de mí.
\footnote{\textbf{13:28} Neh 11,10; Neh 2,19} \bibleverse{29} Acuérdate
de ellos, Dios mío, porque han profanado el sacerdocio y la alianza del
sacerdocio y de los levitas.

\hypertarget{fin-del-memorando}{%
\subsection{Fin del memorando}\label{fin-del-memorando}}

\bibleverse{30} Así los limpié de todos los extranjeros y señalé los
deberes para los sacerdotes y para los levitas, cada uno en su trabajo;
\bibleverse{31} y para la ofrenda de leña, en los tiempos señalados, y
para las primicias. Acuérdate de mí, Dios mío, para bien. \footnote{\textbf{13:31}
  Neh 13,14; Neh 13,22; Neh 5,19} \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{elimination-of-pagan-components-especially-ammonites-and-moabites-from-the-community}{%
\subsection{Elimination of pagan components (especially Ammonites and
Moabites) from the
community}\label{elimination-of-pagan-components-especially-ammonites-and-moabites-from-the-community}}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{13}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} On that day they read in the book of Moses in the hearing
of the people; and it was found written in it that an Ammonite and a
Moabite should not enter into the assembly of God forever,
\bibleverse{2} because they didn't meet the children of Israel with
bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them to curse them;
however, our God turned the curse into a blessing. \bibleverse{3} It
came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated all the
mixed multitude from Israel.

\hypertarget{removal-of-tobijas-cell-in-the-temple}{%
\subsection{Removal of Tobija's cell in the
temple}\label{removal-of-tobijas-cell-in-the-temple}}

\bibleverse{4} Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed
over the rooms of the house of our God, being allied to Tobiah,
\bibleverse{5} had prepared for him a great room, where before they laid
the meal offerings, the frankincense, the vessels, and the tithes of the
grain, the new wine, and the oil, which were given by commandment to the
Levites, the singers, and the gatekeepers; and the wave offerings for
the priests. \bibleverse{6} But in all this, I was not at Jerusalem; for
in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon I went to the
king; and after some days I asked leave of the king, \bibleverse{7} and
I came to Jerusalem, and understood the evil that Eliashib had done for
Tobiah, in preparing him a room in the courts of God's house.
\bibleverse{8} It grieved me severely. Therefore I threw all Tobiah's
household stuff out of the room. \bibleverse{9} Then I commanded, and
they cleansed the rooms. I brought into them the vessels of God's house,
with the meal offerings and the frankincense again.

\hypertarget{ensuring-the-proper-delivery-of-tributes-to-the-levites}{%
\subsection{Ensuring the proper delivery of tributes to the
Levites}\label{ensuring-the-proper-delivery-of-tributes-to-the-levites}}

\bibleverse{10} I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not
been given them, so that the Levites and the singers, who did the work,
had each fled to his field. \bibleverse{11} Then I contended with the
rulers, and said, ``Why is God's house forsaken?'' I gathered them
together, and set them in their place. \bibleverse{12} Then all Judah
brought the tithe of the grain, the new wine, and the oil to the
treasuries. \bibleverse{13} I made treasurers over the treasuries,
Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah:
and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah; for
they were counted faithful, and their business was to distribute to
their brothers. \bibleverse{14} Remember me, my God, concerning this,
and don't wipe out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my
God, and for its observances.

\hypertarget{eliminate-the-desecration-of-the-sabbath-by-businessmen-and-merchants}{%
\subsection{Eliminate the desecration of the Sabbath by businessmen and
merchants}\label{eliminate-the-desecration-of-the-sabbath-by-businessmen-and-merchants}}

\bibleverse{15} In those days I saw some men treading wine presses on
the Sabbath in Judah, bringing in sheaves, and loading donkeys with
wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of burdens which they brought into
Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; and I testified against them in the day in
which they sold food. \bibleverse{16} Some men of Tyre also lived there,
who brought in fish and all kinds of wares, and sold on the Sabbath to
the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. \bibleverse{17} Then I
contended with the nobles of Judah, and said to them, ``What evil thing
is this that you do, and profane the Sabbath day? \bibleverse{18} Didn't
your fathers do this, and didn't our God bring all this evil on us and
on this city? Yet you bring more wrath on Israel by profaning the
Sabbath.'' \bibleverse{19} It came to pass that when the gates of
Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the
doors should be shut, and commanded that they should not be opened until
after the Sabbath. I set some of my servants over the gates, so that no
burden should be brought in on the Sabbath day. \bibleverse{20} So the
merchants and sellers of all kinds of wares camped outside of Jerusalem
once or twice. \bibleverse{21} Then I testified against them, and said
to them, ``Why do you stay around the wall? If you do so again, I will
lay hands on you.'' From that time on, they didn't come on the Sabbath.
\bibleverse{22} I commanded the Levites that they should purify
themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify
the Sabbath day. Remember me for this also, my God, and spare me
according to the greatness of your loving kindness.

\hypertarget{measures-against-mixed-marriages-rejection-of-the-son-of-a-high-priest}{%
\subsection{Measures against mixed marriages; Rejection of the son of a
high
priest}\label{measures-against-mixed-marriages-rejection-of-the-son-of-a-high-priest}}

\bibleverse{23} In those days I also saw the Jews who had married women
of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab; \bibleverse{24} and their children
spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews'
language, but according to the language of each people. \bibleverse{25}
I contended with them, cursed them, struck certain of them, plucked off
their hair, and made them swear by God, ``You shall not give your
daughters to their sons, nor take their daughters for your sons, or for
yourselves. \bibleverse{26} Didn't Solomon king of Israel sin by these
things? Yet among many nations there was no king like him, and he was
loved by his God, and God made him king over all Israel. Nevertheless
foreign women caused even him to sin. \bibleverse{27} Shall we then
listen to you to do all this great evil, to trespass against our God in
marrying foreign women?'' \bibleverse{28} One of the sons of Joiada, the
son of Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the
Horonite; therefore I chased him from me. \bibleverse{29} Remember them,
my God, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the
priesthood and of the Levites.

\hypertarget{end-of-memo}{%
\subsection{End of memo}\label{end-of-memo}}

\bibleverse{30} Thus I cleansed them from all foreigners and appointed
duties for the priests and for the Levites, everyone in his work;
\bibleverse{31} and for the wood offering, at appointed times, and for
the first fruits. Remember me, my God, for good.
\end{otherlanguage} \end{paracol}
