\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{indicaciuxf3n-del-propuxf3sito-de-las-escrituras}{%
\subsection{Indicación del propósito de las
escrituras}\label{indicaciuxf3n-del-propuxf3sito-de-las-escrituras}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Los proverbios de Salomón, hijo de David, rey de Israel:
\footnote{\textbf{1:1} 1Re 4,29-32} \bibleverse{2} para conocer la
sabiduría y la instrucción; para discernir las palabras del
entendimiento; \bibleverse{3} para recibir instrucción en el trato
sabio, en la rectitud, la justicia y la equidad; \bibleverse{4} para dar
prudencia a los simples, conocimiento y discreción al joven ---
\bibleverse{5} para que el sabio escuche y aumente su aprendizaje; para
que el hombre de entendimiento alcance el sano consejo; \bibleverse{6}
para entender un proverbio y parábolas, las palabras y acertijos de los
sabios. \bibleverse{7} El temor a Yahvé\footnote{\textbf{1:7} ``Yahvé''
  es el nombre propio de Dios, a veces traducido como ``\textsc{Señor}''
  (en mayúsculas) en otras traducciones.} es el principio del
conocimiento, pero los necios desprecian la sabiduría y la instrucción.
\footnote{\textbf{1:7} Prov 9,10; Sal 111,10; Job 28,28}

\hypertarget{invitaciuxf3n-a-la-obediencia-voluntaria-advertencia-contra-la-seducciuxf3n-especialmente-antes-de-participar-en-actos-de-violencia}{%
\subsection{Invitación a la obediencia voluntaria; Advertencia contra la
seducción, especialmente antes de participar en actos de
violencia}\label{invitaciuxf3n-a-la-obediencia-voluntaria-advertencia-contra-la-seducciuxf3n-especialmente-antes-de-participar-en-actos-de-violencia}}

\bibleverse{8} Hijo mío, escucha la instrucción de tu padre, y no
abandones las enseñanzas de tu madre; \footnote{\textbf{1:8} Prov 6,20}
\bibleverse{9} pues serán una guirnalda que adornará tu cabeza, y
cadenas alrededor del cuello. \footnote{\textbf{1:9} Prov 4,9}
\bibleverse{10} Hijo mío, si los pecadores te atraenno lo consienten.
\bibleverse{11} Si dicen: ``Ven con nosotros. Acechemos la sangre.
Acechemos en secreto a los inocentes sin causa. \bibleverse{12} Que se
los trague vivos como el Seol, \footnote{\textbf{1:12} El Seol es el
  lugar de los muertos.} y entero, como los que bajan a la fosa.
\bibleverse{13} Encontraremos toda la riqueza valiosa. Llenaremos
nuestras casas con el botín. \bibleverse{14} Echarán su suerte entre
nosotros. Todos tendremos un bolso''--- \bibleverse{15} hijo mío, no
camines por el camino con ellos. Mantén tu pie fuera de su camino,
\bibleverse{16} porque sus pies corren hacia el mal. Se apresuran a
derramar sangre. \bibleverse{17} Porque la red se tiende en vano a la
vista de cualquier ave; \bibleverse{18} pero estos acechan su propia
sangre. Acechan en secreto por sus propias vidas. \bibleverse{19} Así
son los caminos de todo aquel que tiene afán de lucro. Le quita la vida
a sus dueños.

\hypertarget{el-llamado-de-la-sabiduruxeda-para-obedecer-voluntariamente-sus-mandamientos-amenazas-para-los-reacios}{%
\subsection{El llamado de la sabiduría para obedecer voluntariamente sus
mandamientos; Amenazas para los
reacios}\label{el-llamado-de-la-sabiduruxeda-para-obedecer-voluntariamente-sus-mandamientos-amenazas-para-los-reacios}}

\bibleverse{20} La sabiduría llama en voz alta en la calle. Ella
pronuncia su voz en las plazas públicas. \bibleverse{21} Llama a la
cabeza de los lugares ruidosos. A la entrada de las puertas de la
ciudad, pronuncia sus palabras: \footnote{\textbf{1:21} Prov 8,1}
\bibleverse{22} ``¿Hasta cuándo, simples, amaréis la sencillez? Cuánto
tiempo se deleitarán los burladores en la burla, ¿y los tontos odian el
conocimiento? \bibleverse{23} Vuélvete ante mi reprimenda.
Mira,\footnote{\textbf{1:23} ``He aquí'', de ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', significa
  mirar, fijarse, observar, ver o contemplar. Se utiliza a menudo como
  interjección.} derramaré mi espíritu sobre ti. Te daré a conocer mis
palabras. \bibleverse{24} Porque te he llamado y te has negado; He
extendido mi mano y nadie me ha hecho caso; \footnote{\textbf{1:24} Is
  65,2; Is 65,12} \bibleverse{25} pero has ignorado todos mis consejos,
y no quería ninguna de mis reprimendas; \bibleverse{26} Yo también me
reiré de tu desastre. Me burlaré cuando la calamidad te alcance,
\footnote{\textbf{1:26} Prov 3,34} \bibleverse{27} cuando la calamidad
te alcanza como una tormenta, cuando tu desastre llega como un
torbellino, cuando la angustia y la angustia se apoderan de ti.
\bibleverse{28} Entonces me llamarán, pero no responderé. Me buscarán
con ahínco, pero no me encontrarán, \footnote{\textbf{1:28} Is 59,2; Miq
  3,4} \bibleverse{29} porque odiaban el conocimiento, y no eligió el
temor a Yahvé. \bibleverse{30} No querían ningún consejo mío.
Despreciaron toda mi reprimenda. \bibleverse{31} Por eso comerán del
fruto de su propio camino, y se llenan de sus propios esquemas.
\footnote{\textbf{1:31} Is 3,10-11} \bibleverse{32} Porque la
reincidencia de los simples los matará. La despreocupación de los tontos
los destruirá. \footnote{\textbf{1:32} Prov 8,36} \bibleverse{33} Pero
el que me escuche habitará con seguridad, y estarán tranquilos, sin
temor a sufrir daños''. \footnote{\textbf{1:33} Prov 8,34}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{indication-of-the-purpose-of-the-writes}{%
\subsection{Indication of the purpose of the
writes}\label{indication-of-the-purpose-of-the-writes}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of
Israel: \bibleverse{2} to know wisdom and instruction; to discern the
words of understanding; \bibleverse{3} to receive instruction in wise
dealing, in righteousness, justice, and equity; \bibleverse{4} to give
prudence to the simple, knowledge and discretion to the young man---
\bibleverse{5} that the wise man may hear, and increase in learning;
that the man of understanding may attain to sound counsel;
\bibleverse{6} to understand a proverb and parables, the words and
riddles of the wise. \bibleverse{7} The fear of Yahweh\footnote{\textbf{1:7}
  ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name, sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}''
  (all caps) in other translations.} is the beginning of knowledge, but
the foolish despise wisdom and instruction.

\hypertarget{invitation-to-voluntary-obedience-warning-against-seduction-especially-before-engaging-in-acts-of-violence}{%
\subsection{Invitation to voluntary obedience; Warning against
seduction, especially before engaging in acts of
violence}\label{invitation-to-voluntary-obedience-warning-against-seduction-especially-before-engaging-in-acts-of-violence}}

\bibleverse{8} My son, listen to your father's instruction, and don't
forsake your mother's teaching; \bibleverse{9} for they will be a
garland to grace your head, and chains around your neck. \bibleverse{10}
My son, if sinners entice you, don't consent. \bibleverse{11} If they
say, ``Come with us. Let's lie in wait for blood. Let's lurk secretly
for the innocent without cause. \bibleverse{12} Let's swallow them up
alive like Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{1:12} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
and whole, like those who go down into the pit. \bibleverse{13} We'll
find all valuable wealth. We'll fill our houses with plunder.
\bibleverse{14} You shall cast your lot among us. We'll all have one
purse''--- \bibleverse{15} my son, don't walk on the path with them.
Keep your foot from their path, \bibleverse{16} for their feet run to
evil. They hurry to shed blood. \bibleverse{17} For the net is spread in
vain in the sight of any bird; \bibleverse{18} but these lay in wait for
their own blood. They lurk secretly for their own lives. \bibleverse{19}
So are the ways of everyone who is greedy for gain. It takes away the
life of its owners.

\hypertarget{wisdoms-call-to-willingly-obey-her-commandments-threats-to-the-reluctant}{%
\subsection{Wisdom's call to willingly obey her commandments; Threats to
the
Reluctant}\label{wisdoms-call-to-willingly-obey-her-commandments-threats-to-the-reluctant}}

\bibleverse{20} Wisdom calls aloud in the street. She utters her voice
in the public squares. \bibleverse{21} She calls at the head of noisy
places. At the entrance of the city gates, she utters her words:
\bibleverse{22} ``How long, you simple ones, will you love simplicity?
How long will mockers delight themselves in mockery, and fools hate
knowledge? \bibleverse{23} Turn at my reproof. Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:23}
  ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} I will
pour out my spirit on you. I will make known my words to you.
\bibleverse{24} Because I have called, and you have refused; I have
stretched out my hand, and no one has paid attention; \bibleverse{25}
but you have ignored all my counsel, and wanted none of my reproof;
\bibleverse{26} I also will laugh at your disaster. I will mock when
calamity overtakes you, \bibleverse{27} when calamity overtakes you like
a storm, when your disaster comes on like a whirlwind, when distress and
anguish come on you. \bibleverse{28} Then they will call on me, but I
will not answer. They will seek me diligently, but they will not find
me, \bibleverse{29} because they hated knowledge, and didn't choose the
fear of Yahweh. \bibleverse{30} They wanted none of my counsel. They
despised all my reproof. \bibleverse{31} Therefore they will eat of the
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own schemes.
\bibleverse{32} For the backsliding of the simple will kill them. The
careless ease of fools will destroy them. \bibleverse{33} But whoever
listens to me will dwell securely, and will be at ease, without fear of
harm.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{las-bendiciones-de-buscar-diligentemente-la-sabiduruxeda}{%
\subsection{Las bendiciones de buscar diligentemente la
sabiduría}\label{las-bendiciones-de-buscar-diligentemente-la-sabiduruxeda}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Hijo mío, si recibes mis palabras, y guardad mis
mandamientos en vuestro interior, \bibleverse{2} para que vuelvas tu
oído a la sabiduría, y aplica tu corazón a la comprensión;
\bibleverse{3} sí, si se llama al discernimiento, y levanta tu voz para
que te entiendan; \footnote{\textbf{2:3} Sant 1,5} \bibleverse{4} si la
buscas como plata, y buscarla como a los tesoros escondidos;
\bibleverse{5} entonces entenderás el temor de Yahvé, y encontrar el
conocimiento de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{2:5} La palabra hebrea traducida
  como ``Dios'' es ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} \bibleverse{6} Porque
Yahvé da sabiduría. De su boca sale el conocimiento y la comprensión.
\bibleverse{7} Él acumula la sana sabiduría para los rectos. Es un
escudo para los que caminan con integridad, \footnote{\textbf{2:7} Ecl
  7,29} \bibleverse{8} para que guarde los caminos de la justicia, y
preservar el camino de sus santos. \bibleverse{9} Entonces entenderás la
rectitud y la justicia, la equidad y todo buen camino. \bibleverse{10}
Porque la sabiduría entrará en tu corazón. El conocimiento será
agradable para tu alma. \bibleverse{11} La discreción velará por ti. La
comprensión te mantendrá, \bibleverse{12} para librarte del camino del
mal, de los hombres que hablan cosas perversas, \bibleverse{13} que
abandonan los caminos de la rectitud, para andar por los caminos de la
oscuridad, \bibleverse{14} que se alegran de hacer el mal, y se deleitan
en la perversidad del mal, \bibleverse{15} que son torcidos en sus
caminos, y descarriados en sus caminos, \bibleverse{16} para librarte de
la mujer extraña, incluso de la extranjera que halaga con sus palabras,
\footnote{\textbf{2:16} Prov 6,24; Prov 7,5; Prov 5,3} \bibleverse{17}
que abandona al amigo de su juventud, y olvida el pacto de su Dios;
\bibleverse{18} por su casa lleva a la muerte, sus caminos a los
espíritus difuntos. \footnote{\textbf{2:18} Prov 5,5-6} \bibleverse{19}
Ninguno de los que van a ella regresa, ni alcanzan los caminos de la
vida. \bibleverse{20} Por lo tanto, camina por el camino de los hombres
buenos, y guarda los caminos de los justos. \bibleverse{21} Porque los
rectos habitarán la tierra. Lo perfecto permanecerá en él. \footnote{\textbf{2:21}
  Sal 37,9; Sal 37,29; Mat 5,5} \bibleverse{22} Pero los malvados serán
eliminados de la tierra. Los traidores serán desarraigados de ella.
\footnote{\textbf{2:22} Sal 37,10; Sal 37,22}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-blessings-of-diligently-seeking-wisdom}{%
\subsection{The blessings of diligently seeking
wisdom}\label{the-blessings-of-diligently-seeking-wisdom}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, if you will receive my words, and store up my
commandments within you, \bibleverse{2} so as to turn your ear to
wisdom, and apply your heart to understanding; \bibleverse{3} yes, if
you call out for discernment, and lift up your voice for understanding;
\bibleverse{4} if you seek her as silver, and search for her as for
hidden treasures; \bibleverse{5} then you will understand the fear of
Yahweh, and find the knowledge of God.\footnote{\textbf{2:5} The Hebrew
  word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} \bibleverse{6}
For Yahweh gives wisdom. Out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. \bibleverse{7} He lays up sound wisdom for the upright.
He is a shield to those who walk in integrity, \bibleverse{8} that he
may guard the paths of justice, and preserve the way of his saints.
\bibleverse{9} Then you will understand righteousness and justice,
equity and every good path. \bibleverse{10} For wisdom will enter into
your heart. Knowledge will be pleasant to your soul. \bibleverse{11}
Discretion will watch over you. Understanding will keep you,
\bibleverse{12} to deliver you from the way of evil, from the men who
speak perverse things, \bibleverse{13} who forsake the paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness, \bibleverse{14} who
rejoice to do evil, and delight in the perverseness of evil,
\bibleverse{15} who are crooked in their ways, and wayward in their
paths, \bibleverse{16} to deliver you from the strange woman, even from
the foreigner who flatters with her words, \bibleverse{17} who forsakes
the friend of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God;
\bibleverse{18} for her house leads down to death, her paths to the
departed spirits. \bibleverse{19} None who go to her return again,
neither do they attain to the paths of life. \bibleverse{20} Therefore
walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.
\bibleverse{21} For the upright will dwell in the land. The perfect will
remain in it. \bibleverse{22} But the wicked will be cut off from the
land. The treacherous will be rooted out of it.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{advertencias-sobre-el-temor-de-dios-y-el-comportamiento-moral-con-referencia-a-la-recompensa-esperada}{%
\subsection{Advertencias sobre el temor de Dios y el comportamiento
moral con referencia a la recompensa
esperada}\label{advertencias-sobre-el-temor-de-dios-y-el-comportamiento-moral-con-referencia-a-la-recompensa-esperada}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Hijo mío, no olvides mis enseñanzas, pero que tu corazón
guarde mis mandamientos, \bibleverse{2} porque te añadirán la duración
de los días, años de vida, y la paz. \footnote{\textbf{3:2} Prov 4,10;
  Lev 18,5} \bibleverse{3} No dejes que la bondad y la verdad te
abandonen. Átalos alrededor de tu cuello. Escríbelos en la tabla de tu
corazón. \footnote{\textbf{3:3} Prov 6,21; Deut 6,8; Jer 31,33}
\bibleverse{4} Así encontrarás el favor, y buen entendimiento ante Dios
y los hombres. \footnote{\textbf{3:4} Luc 2,52} \bibleverse{5} Confía en
Yahvé con todo tu corazón, y no te apoyes en tu propio entendimiento.
\bibleverse{6} Reconócelo en todos tus caminos, y él enderezará tus
caminos. \bibleverse{7} No seas sabio en tus propios ojos. Teme a Yahvé
y apártate del mal. \footnote{\textbf{3:7} Is 5,21} \bibleverse{8} Será
salud para tu cuerpo, y alimento para tus huesos. \footnote{\textbf{3:8}
  Prov 4,22} \bibleverse{9} Honra a Yahvé con tu sustancia, con las
primicias de todo su incremento; \footnote{\textbf{3:9} Éxod 23,19}
\bibleverse{10} para que tus graneros se llenen de abundancia, y sus
cubas rebosarán de vino nuevo. \bibleverse{11} Hijo mío, no desprecies
la disciplina de Yahvé, ni te canses de su corrección; \footnote{\textbf{3:11}
  Job 5,17-19; Heb 12,5-6} \bibleverse{12} porque al que ama Yahvé, lo
corrige, como un padre reprende al hijo en el que se deleita.
\footnote{\textbf{3:12} Apoc 3,19}

\hypertarget{valor-y-bendiciuxf3n-de-la-sabiduruxeda}{%
\subsection{Valor y bendición de la
sabiduría}\label{valor-y-bendiciuxf3n-de-la-sabiduruxeda}}

\bibleverse{13} Feliz es el hombre que encuentra la sabiduría, el hombre
que consigue la comprensión. \footnote{\textbf{3:13} Mat 13,44}
\bibleverse{14} Para ella es mejor la ganancia que la obtención de
plata, y su retorno es mejor que el oro fino. \footnote{\textbf{3:14}
  Prov 8,10; Prov 8,19} \bibleverse{15} Ella es más preciosa que los
rubíes. Ninguna de las cosas que puedes desear se puede comparar con
ella. \footnote{\textbf{3:15} Mat 13,45-46} \bibleverse{16} La duración
de los días está en su mano derecha. En su mano izquierda hay riquezas y
honor. \footnote{\textbf{3:16} Prov 3,2} \bibleverse{17} Sus caminos son
caminos de placer. Todos sus caminos son la paz. \bibleverse{18} Ella es
un árbol de vida para los que se aferran a ella. Feliz es todo aquel que
la retiene. \bibleverse{19} Por la sabiduría, Yahvé fundó la tierra.
Mediante el entendimiento, estableció los cielos. \footnote{\textbf{3:19}
  Prov 8,24-30} \bibleverse{20} Por su conocimiento, las profundidades
se rompieron, y los cielos dejan caer el rocío. \bibleverse{21} Hijo
mío, que no se aparten de tus ojos. Mantén la sensatez y la discreción,
\bibleverse{22} así serán la vida de tu alma, y gracia para tu cuello.
\footnote{\textbf{3:22} Prov 1,9} \bibleverse{23} Entonces, seguirás tu
camino con seguridad. Tu pie no tropezará. \bibleverse{24} Cuando te
acuestes, no tendrás miedo. Sí, te acostarás y tu sueño será dulce.
\footnote{\textbf{3:24} Sal 3,5; Sal 4,8} \bibleverse{25} No tengas
miedo del miedo repentino, ni de la desolación de los malvados, cuando
llegue; \bibleverse{26} porque Yahvé será tu confianza, y evitará que te
cojan el pie. \footnote{\textbf{3:26} Prov 10,29}

\hypertarget{advertencias-contra-el-desamor-hacia-el-pruxf3jimo-y-contra-la-violencia}{%
\subsection{Advertencias contra el desamor hacia el prójimo y contra la
violencia}\label{advertencias-contra-el-desamor-hacia-el-pruxf3jimo-y-contra-la-violencia}}

\bibleverse{27} No niegues el bien a quien se lo merece, cuando está en
el poder de tu mano hacerlo. \bibleverse{28} No digas a tu prójimo:
``Vete y vuelve''; mañana te lo daré''. cuando lo tengas a tu lado.
\bibleverse{29} No trates de hacer el mal a tu prójimo, ya que habita
con seguridad junto a ti. \bibleverse{30} No te pelees con un hombre sin
motivo, si no te ha hecho ningún daño. \bibleverse{31} No envidies al
hombre violento. No elijas ninguno de sus caminos. \bibleverse{32}
Porque el perverso es una abominación para Yahvé, pero su amistad es con
los rectos. \footnote{\textbf{3:32} Sal 25,14} \bibleverse{33} La
maldición de Yahvé está en la casa de los malvados, pero bendice la
morada de los justos. \bibleverse{34} Seguramente se burla de los
burlones, pero da gracia a los humildes. \footnote{\textbf{3:34} Prov
  1,26; 1Pe 5,5} \bibleverse{35} Los sabios heredarán la gloria, pero la
vergüenza será la promoción de los tontos.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{warnings-about-the-fear-of-god-and-moral-behavior-with-reference-to-the-expected-reward}{%
\subsection{Warnings about the fear of God and moral behavior with
reference to the expected
reward}\label{warnings-about-the-fear-of-god-and-moral-behavior-with-reference-to-the-expected-reward}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, don't forget my teaching, but let your heart keep
my commandments, \bibleverse{2} for they will add to you length of days,
years of life, and peace. \bibleverse{3} Don't let kindness and truth
forsake you. Bind them around your neck. Write them on the tablet of
your heart. \bibleverse{4} So you will find favor, and good
understanding in the sight of God and man. \bibleverse{5} Trust in
Yahweh with all your heart, and don't lean on your own understanding.
\bibleverse{6} In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make your
paths straight. \bibleverse{7} Don't be wise in your own eyes. Fear
Yahweh, and depart from evil. \bibleverse{8} It will be health to your
body, and nourishment to your bones. \bibleverse{9} Honor Yahweh with
your substance, with the first fruits of all your increase;
\bibleverse{10} so your barns will be filled with plenty, and your vats
will overflow with new wine. \bibleverse{11} My son, don't despise
Yahweh's discipline, neither be weary of his correction; \bibleverse{12}
for whom Yahweh loves, he corrects, even as a father reproves the son in
whom he delights.

\hypertarget{courage-and-blessing-of-wisdom}{%
\subsection{Courage and blessing of
wisdom}\label{courage-and-blessing-of-wisdom}}

\bibleverse{13} Happy is the man who finds wisdom, the man who gets
understanding. \bibleverse{14} For her good profit is better than
getting silver, and her return is better than fine gold. \bibleverse{15}
She is more precious than rubies. None of the things you can desire are
to be compared to her. \bibleverse{16} Length of days is in her right
hand. In her left hand are riches and honor. \bibleverse{17} Her ways
are ways of pleasantness. All her paths are peace. \bibleverse{18} She
is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her. Happy is everyone who
retains her. \bibleverse{19} By wisdom Yahweh founded the earth. By
understanding, he established the heavens. \bibleverse{20} By his
knowledge, the depths were broken up, and the skies drop down the dew.
\bibleverse{21} My son, let them not depart from your eyes. Keep sound
wisdom and discretion, \bibleverse{22} so they will be life to your
soul, and grace for your neck. \bibleverse{23} Then you shall walk in
your way securely. Your foot won't stumble. \bibleverse{24} When you lie
down, you will not be afraid. Yes, you will lie down, and your sleep
will be sweet. \bibleverse{25} Don't be afraid of sudden fear, neither
of the desolation of the wicked, when it comes; \bibleverse{26} for
Yahweh will be your confidence, and will keep your foot from being
taken.

\hypertarget{warnings-against-lack-of-love-towards-others-and-against-violence}{%
\subsection{Warnings against lack of love towards others and against
violence}\label{warnings-against-lack-of-love-towards-others-and-against-violence}}

\bibleverse{27} Don't withhold good from those to whom it is due, when
it is in the power of your hand to do it. \bibleverse{28} Don't say to
your neighbor, ``Go, and come again; tomorrow I will give it to you,''
when you have it by you. \bibleverse{29} Don't devise evil against your
neighbor, since he dwells securely by you. \bibleverse{30} Don't strive
with a man without cause, if he has done you no harm. \bibleverse{31}
Don't envy the man of violence. Choose none of his ways. \bibleverse{32}
For the perverse is an abomination to Yahweh, but his friendship is with
the upright. \bibleverse{33} Yahweh's curse is in the house of the
wicked, but he blesses the habitation of the righteous. \bibleverse{34}
Surely he mocks the mockers, but he gives grace to the humble.
\bibleverse{35} The wise will inherit glory, but shame will be the
promotion of fools.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-paternal-a-buscar-sabiduruxeda-y-obedecer-sus-enseuxf1anzas}{%
\subsection{Exhortación paternal a buscar sabiduría y obedecer sus
enseñanzas}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-paternal-a-buscar-sabiduruxeda-y-obedecer-sus-enseuxf1anzas}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} Escuchad, hijos, la instrucción de un padre. Presta
atención y conoce la comprensión; \bibleverse{2} porque te doy un
aprendizaje sólido. No abandones mi ley. \bibleverse{3} Porque yo era
hijo de mi padre, tierna y única a los ojos de mi madre. \bibleverse{4}
Me enseñó y me dijo: ``Que tu corazón retenga mis palabras. Guarda mis
mandamientos y vive. \footnote{\textbf{4:4} Lev 18,5} \bibleverse{5}
Obtenga sabiduría. Compréndelo. No lo olvides, y no te desvíes de las
palabras de mi boca. \footnote{\textbf{4:5} Prov 3,1} \bibleverse{6} No
la abandones, y ella te preservará. Ámala, y ella te mantendrá.
\bibleverse{7} La sabiduría es suprema. Consigue sabiduría. Sí, aunque
te cueste todas tus posesiones, sé comprensivo. \bibleverse{8}
Estimadla, y ella os exaltará. Ella te llevará al honor cuando la
abraces. \bibleverse{9} Ella dará a tu cabeza una guirnalda de gracia.
Te entregará una corona de esplendor''. \footnote{\textbf{4:9} Prov 1,9}
\bibleverse{10} Escucha, hijo mío, y recibe mis palabras. Los años de tu
vida serán muchos. \footnote{\textbf{4:10} Prov 3,2} \bibleverse{11} Te
he enseñado el camino de la sabiduría. Te he guiado por caminos rectos.
\footnote{\textbf{4:11} Sal 32,8; Sal 27,11} \bibleverse{12} Cuando
vayas, tus pasos no se verán obstaculizados. Cuando corras, no
tropezarás. \bibleverse{13} Agarra firmemente la instrucción. No la
dejes ir. Quédate con ella, porque es tu vida. \bibleverse{14} No entres
en el camino de los malvados. No sigas el camino de los hombres malos.
\footnote{\textbf{4:14} Prov 1,10; Sal 1,1} \bibleverse{15} Evítalo y no
pases de largo. Apártate de él y pasa de largo. \bibleverse{16} Porque
no duermen si no hacen el mal. Se les quita el sueño, a menos que hagan
caer a alguien. \bibleverse{17} Porque comen el pan de la maldady beber
el vino de la violencia. \bibleverse{18} Pero el camino de los justos es
como la luz del amanecerque brilla más y más hasta el día perfecto.
\bibleverse{19} El camino de los malvados es como la oscuridad. No saben
con qué tropiezan. \footnote{\textbf{4:19} Prov 13,9; Prov 24,20}
\bibleverse{20} Hijo mío, atiende a mis palabras. Poned el oído en mis
palabras. \bibleverse{21} Que no se aparten de tus ojos. Manténgalos en
el centro de su corazón. \bibleverse{22} Porque son la vida para los que
las encuentran, y salud a todo su cuerpo. \footnote{\textbf{4:22} Prov
  3,8; Prov 3,13-16} \bibleverse{23} Guarda tu corazón con toda
diligencia, porque de ella brota el manantial de la vida.
\bibleverse{24} Aparta de ti la boca perversa. Poner los labios
corruptos lejos de ti. \bibleverse{25} Deja que tus ojos miren al
frente. Fija tu mirada directamente delante de ti. \bibleverse{26} Haz
que el camino de tus pies sea llano. Que se establezcan todos sus
caminos. \footnote{\textbf{4:26} Heb 12,13} \bibleverse{27} No te
vuelvas a la derecha ni a la izquierda. Retira tu pie del mal.
\footnote{\textbf{4:27} Deut 5,29}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{parental-exhortation-to-seek-wisdom-and-obey-its-teachings}{%
\subsection{Parental exhortation to seek wisdom and obey its
teachings}\label{parental-exhortation-to-seek-wisdom-and-obey-its-teachings}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Listen, sons, to a father's instruction. Pay attention
and know understanding; \bibleverse{2} for I give you sound learning.
Don't forsake my law. \bibleverse{3} For I was a son to my father,
tender and an only child in the sight of my mother. \bibleverse{4} He
taught me, and said to me: ``Let your heart retain my words. Keep my
commandments, and live. \bibleverse{5} Get wisdom. Get understanding.
Don't forget, and don't deviate from the words of my mouth.
\bibleverse{6} Don't forsake her, and she will preserve you. Love her,
and she will keep you. \bibleverse{7} Wisdom is supreme. Get wisdom.
Yes, though it costs all your possessions, get understanding.
\bibleverse{8} Esteem her, and she will exalt you. She will bring you to
honor when you embrace her. \bibleverse{9} She will give to your head a
garland of grace. She will deliver a crown of splendor to you.''
\bibleverse{10} Listen, my son, and receive my sayings. The years of
your life will be many. \bibleverse{11} I have taught you in the way of
wisdom. I have led you in straight paths. \bibleverse{12} When you go,
your steps will not be hampered. When you run, you will not stumble.
\bibleverse{13} Take firm hold of instruction. Don't let her go. Keep
her, for she is your life. \bibleverse{14} Don't enter into the path of
the wicked. Don't walk in the way of evil men. \bibleverse{15} Avoid it,
and don't pass by it. Turn from it, and pass on. \bibleverse{16} For
they don't sleep unless they do evil. Their sleep is taken away, unless
they make someone fall. \bibleverse{17} For they eat the bread of
wickedness and drink the wine of violence. \bibleverse{18} But the path
of the righteous is like the dawning light that shines more and more
until the perfect day. \bibleverse{19} The way of the wicked is like
darkness. They don't know what they stumble over. \bibleverse{20} My
son, attend to my words. Turn your ear to my sayings. \bibleverse{21}
Let them not depart from your eyes. Keep them in the center of your
heart. \bibleverse{22} For they are life to those who find them, and
health to their whole body. \bibleverse{23} Keep your heart with all
diligence, for out of it is the wellspring of life. \bibleverse{24} Put
away from yourself a perverse mouth. Put corrupt lips far from you.
\bibleverse{25} Let your eyes look straight ahead. Fix your gaze
directly before you. \bibleverse{26} Make the path of your feet level.
Let all of your ways be established. \bibleverse{27} Don't turn to the
right hand nor to the left. Remove your foot from evil.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{advertencia-contra-el-coito-con-aduxfalteras-alabanza-de-la-vida-conyugal}{%
\subsection{Advertencia contra el coito con adúlteras; Alabanza de la
vida
conyugal}\label{advertencia-contra-el-coito-con-aduxfalteras-alabanza-de-la-vida-conyugal}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Hijo mío, presta atención a mi sabiduría. Poner el oído
en mi entendimiento, \bibleverse{2} que pueda mantener la discreción,
para que tus labios conserven el conocimiento. \bibleverse{3} Porque los
labios de una adúltera gotean miel. Su boca es más suave que el aceite,
\footnote{\textbf{5:3} Prov 2,16-19} \bibleverse{4} pero al final es tan
amarga como el ajenjo, y tan afilado como una espada de dos filos.
\bibleverse{5} Sus pies bajan a la muerte. Sus pasos conducen
directamente al Seol. \footnote{\textbf{5:5} El Seol es el lugar de los
  muertos.} \bibleverse{6} No piensa en el camino de la vida. Sus
caminos están torcidos, y ella no lo sabe. \bibleverse{7} Ahora, pues,
hijos míos, escuchadme. No te apartes de las palabras de mi boca.
\bibleverse{8} Quita tu camino lejos de ella. No te acerques a la puerta
de su casa, \bibleverse{9} para que no des tu honor a otros, y tus años
a la cruel; \bibleverse{10} para que los extraños no se den un festín
con tu riqueza, y tus labores enriquecen la casa de otro.
\bibleverse{11} Gemirás al final de tu vida, cuando tu carne y tu cuerpo
se consuman, \bibleverse{12} y decir: ``Cómo he odiado la instrucción, y
mi corazón despreció la reprensión. \bibleverse{13} No he obedecido la
voz de mis maestros, ni he prestado oídos a los que me han instruido.
\bibleverse{14} He llegado al borde de la ruina total, entre la asamblea
reunida''. \bibleverse{15} Bebe agua de tu propia cisterna, agua
corriente de su propio pozo. \bibleverse{16} Si tus manantiales se
desbordan en las calles, ¿corrientes de agua en las plazas públicas?
\bibleverse{17} Que sean sólo para ti, no para los extraños con usted.
\bibleverse{18} Que se bendiga tu primavera. Alégrate con la esposa de
tu juventud. \bibleverse{19} Una cierva cariñosa y un ciervo elegante
---deja que sus pechos te satisfagan en todo momento. Déjate cautivar
siempre por su amor. \bibleverse{20} ¿Por qué, hijo mío, has de ser
cautivado por una adúltera? ¿Por qué abrazar el seno de otro?
\bibleverse{21} Porque los caminos del hombre están ante los ojos de
Yahvé. Examina todos sus caminos. \bibleverse{22} Las malas acciones de
los malvados lo atrapan. Las cuerdas de su pecado lo sujetan firmemente.
\bibleverse{23} Morirá por falta de instrucción. En la grandeza de su
locura, se extraviará.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses-praise-of-married-life}{%
\subsection{Warning against intercourse with adulteresses; Praise of
married
life}\label{warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses-praise-of-married-life}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Turn your ear to my
understanding, \bibleverse{2} that you may maintain discretion, that
your lips may preserve knowledge. \bibleverse{3} For the lips of an
adulteress drip honey. Her mouth is smoother than oil, \bibleverse{4}
but in the end she is as bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a two-edged
sword. \bibleverse{5} Her feet go down to death. Her steps lead straight
to Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{5:5} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
\bibleverse{6} She gives no thought to the way of life. Her ways are
crooked, and she doesn't know it. \bibleverse{7} Now therefore, my sons,
listen to me. Don't depart from the words of my mouth. \bibleverse{8}
Remove your way far from her. Don't come near the door of her house,
\bibleverse{9} lest you give your honor to others, and your years to the
cruel one; \bibleverse{10} lest strangers feast on your wealth, and your
labors enrich another man's house. \bibleverse{11} You will groan at
your latter end, when your flesh and your body are consumed,
\bibleverse{12} and say, ``How I have hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof. \bibleverse{13} I haven't obeyed the voice of my
teachers, nor turned my ear to those who instructed me! \bibleverse{14}
I have come to the brink of utter ruin, among the gathered assembly.''
\bibleverse{15} Drink water out of your own cistern, running water out
of your own well. \bibleverse{16} Should your springs overflow in the
streets, streams of water in the public squares? \bibleverse{17} Let
them be for yourself alone, not for strangers with you. \bibleverse{18}
Let your spring be blessed. Rejoice in the wife of your youth.
\bibleverse{19} A loving doe and a graceful deer--- let her breasts
satisfy you at all times. Be captivated always with her love.
\bibleverse{20} For why should you, my son, be captivated with an
adulteress? Why embrace the bosom of another? \bibleverse{21} For the
ways of man are before Yahweh's eyes. He examines all his paths.
\bibleverse{22} The evil deeds of the wicked ensnare him. The cords of
his sin hold him firmly. \bibleverse{23} He will die for lack of
instruction. In the greatness of his folly, he will go astray.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{advertencias-sobre-seguridad-indolencia-falsedad-y-todos-los-seres-impiedosos}{%
\subsection{Advertencias sobre seguridad, indolencia, falsedad y todos
los seres
impiedosos}\label{advertencias-sobre-seguridad-indolencia-falsedad-y-todos-los-seres-impiedosos}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Hijo mío, si te has convertido en garantía de tu prójimo,
si has golpeado tus manos en prenda por un extraño, \footnote{\textbf{6:1}
  Prov 11,15; Prov 17,8; Prov 20,16} \bibleverse{2} estás atrapado por
las palabras de tu boca; estás atrapado con las palabras de tu boca.
\bibleverse{3} Hazlo ahora, hijo mío, y líbrate, ya que has llegado a la
mano de tu vecino. Ve, humíllate. Presiona tu súplica con tu vecino.
\bibleverse{4} No le des sueño a tus ojos, ni el sueño a sus párpados.
\bibleverse{5} Libérate, como una gacela de la mano del cazador, como un
pájaro de la trampa del cazador. \bibleverse{6} Ve a la hormiga,
perezoso. Considera sus formas, y sé sabio; \footnote{\textbf{6:6} Prov
  10,4; Prov 20,4} \bibleverse{7} que no tienen jefe, supervisor o
gobernante, \bibleverse{8} le proporciona el pan en el verano, y recoge
su alimento en la cosecha. \bibleverse{9} ¿Cuánto tiempo vas a dormir,
perezoso? ¿Cuándo te levantarás de tu sueño? \bibleverse{10} Un poco de
sueño, un poco de sopor, un pequeño pliegue de las manos para dormir ---
\footnote{\textbf{6:10} Prov 24,33-34} \bibleverse{11} así que tu
pobreza vendrá como un ladrón, y su escasez como hombre armado.
\bibleverse{12} Una persona sin valor, un hombre de iniquidad, es el que
anda con la boca perversa, \footnote{\textbf{6:12} Prov 10,31-32}
\bibleverse{13} que guiña los ojos, que hace señales con los pies, que
hace gestos con los dedos, \footnote{\textbf{6:13} Prov 10,10}
\bibleverse{14} en cuyo corazón hay perversidad, que urde el mal
continuamente, que siempre siembra la discordia. \bibleverse{15} Por lo
tanto, su calamidad vendrá de repente. Se romperá de repente, y eso sin
remedio. \bibleverse{16} Hay seis cosas que Yahvé odia; sí, siete que
son una abominación para él: \bibleverse{17} ojos arrogantes, una lengua
mentirosa, manos que derraman sangre inocente, \bibleverse{18} un
corazón que urde planes perversos, pies que son rápidos en correr a la
travesura, \bibleverse{19} un testigo falso que dice mentiras, y el que
siembra la discordia entre hermanos.

\hypertarget{otra-advertencia-contra-el-coito-con-aduxfalteras}{%
\subsection{Otra advertencia contra el coito con
adúlteras}\label{otra-advertencia-contra-el-coito-con-aduxfalteras}}

\bibleverse{20} Hijo mío, cumple el mandamiento de tu padre, y no
abandones las enseñanzas de tu madre. \footnote{\textbf{6:20} Prov 1,8}
\bibleverse{21} Átalas continuamente en tu corazón. Átalos alrededor de
tu cuello. \footnote{\textbf{6:21} Prov 3,3} \bibleverse{22} Cuando
camines, te guiará. Cuando duermas, te vigilará. Cuando te despiertes,
hablará contigo. \footnote{\textbf{6:22} Sal 119,172} \bibleverse{23}
Porque el mandamiento es una lámpara, y la ley es ligera. Los reproches
de instrucción son el camino de la vida, \bibleverse{24} para alejarte
de la mujer inmoral, de los halagos de la lengua de la esposa díscola.
\footnote{\textbf{6:24} Prov 2,16} \bibleverse{25} No codicies su
belleza en tu corazón, ni dejar que te cautive con sus párpados.
\bibleverse{26} Porque una prostituta te reduce a un trozo de pan. La
adúltera caza tu preciosa vida. \bibleverse{27} ¿Puede un hombre recoger
fuego en su regazo, y sus ropas no sean quemadas? \bibleverse{28} O se
puede caminar sobre las brasas, y sus pies no se quemen? \bibleverse{29}
Así es el que se acerca a la mujer de su prójimo. Quien la toque no
quedará impune. \footnote{\textbf{6:29} Prov 5,10-14} \bibleverse{30}
Los hombres no desprecian al ladrónsi roba para satisfacerse cuando
tiene hambre, \bibleverse{31} pero si se le encuentra, deberá restituir
siete veces. Dará toda la riqueza de su casa. \bibleverse{32} El que
comete adulterio con una mujer está vacío de entendimiento. Quien lo
hace destruye su propia alma. \footnote{\textbf{6:32} 1Cor 6,18}
\bibleverse{33} Recibirá heridas y deshonra. Su reproche no será
borrado. \bibleverse{34} Porque los celos despiertan la furia del
marido. No perdonará en el día de la venganza. \bibleverse{35} No
considerará ningún rescate, ni estará contento, aunque le des muchos
regalos.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{warnings-about-security-indolence-falsehood-and-all-ungodly-beings}{%
\subsection{Warnings about security, indolence, falsehood and all
ungodly
beings}\label{warnings-about-security-indolence-falsehood-and-all-ungodly-beings}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, if you have become collateral for your neighbor,
if you have struck your hands in pledge for a stranger, \bibleverse{2}
you are trapped by the words of your mouth; you are ensnared with the
words of your mouth. \bibleverse{3} Do this now, my son, and deliver
yourself, since you have come into the hand of your neighbor. Go, humble
yourself. Press your plea with your neighbor. \bibleverse{4} Give no
sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids. \bibleverse{5} Free
yourself, like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter, like a bird from
the snare of the fowler. \bibleverse{6} Go to the ant, you sluggard.
Consider her ways, and be wise; \bibleverse{7} which having no chief,
overseer, or ruler, \bibleverse{8} provides her bread in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. \bibleverse{9} How long will you sleep,
sluggard? When will you arise out of your sleep? \bibleverse{10} A
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep--- \bibleverse{11} so your poverty will come as a robber, and your
scarcity as an armed man. \bibleverse{12} A worthless person, a man of
iniquity, is he who walks with a perverse mouth, \bibleverse{13} who
winks with his eyes, who signals with his feet, who motions with his
fingers, \bibleverse{14} in whose heart is perverseness, who devises
evil continually, who always sows discord. \bibleverse{15} Therefore his
calamity will come suddenly. He will be broken suddenly, and that
without remedy. \bibleverse{16} There are six things which Yahweh hates;
yes, seven which are an abomination to him: \bibleverse{17} arrogant
eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, \bibleverse{18} a
heart that devises wicked schemes, feet that are swift in running to
mischief, \bibleverse{19} a false witness who utters lies, and he who
sows discord among brothers.

\hypertarget{another-warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses}{%
\subsection{Another warning against intercourse with
adulteresses}\label{another-warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses}}

\bibleverse{20} My son, keep your father's commandment, and don't
forsake your mother's teaching. \bibleverse{21} Bind them continually on
your heart. Tie them around your neck. \bibleverse{22} When you walk, it
will lead you. When you sleep, it will watch over you. When you awake,
it will talk with you. \bibleverse{23} For the commandment is a lamp,
and the law is light. Reproofs of instruction are the way of life,
\bibleverse{24} to keep you from the immoral woman, from the flattery of
the wayward wife's tongue. \bibleverse{25} Don't lust after her beauty
in your heart, neither let her captivate you with her eyelids.
\bibleverse{26} For a prostitute reduces you to a piece of bread. The
adulteress hunts for your precious life. \bibleverse{27} Can a man scoop
fire into his lap, and his clothes not be burned? \bibleverse{28} Or can
one walk on hot coals, and his feet not be scorched? \bibleverse{29} So
is he who goes in to his neighbor's wife. Whoever touches her will not
be unpunished. \bibleverse{30} Men don't despise a thief if he steals to
satisfy himself when he is hungry, \bibleverse{31} but if he is found,
he shall restore seven times. He shall give all the wealth of his house.
\bibleverse{32} He who commits adultery with a woman is void of
understanding. He who does it destroys his own soul. \bibleverse{33} He
will get wounds and dishonor. His reproach will not be wiped away.
\bibleverse{34} For jealousy arouses the fury of the husband. He won't
spare in the day of vengeance. \bibleverse{35} He won't regard any
ransom, neither will he rest content, though you give many gifts.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{descripciuxf3n-de-la-seducciuxf3n-a-la-fornicaciuxf3n-aduxfaltera-advertencia-de-sus-nefastas-consecuencias}{%
\subsection{Descripción de la seducción a la fornicación adúltera;
Advertencia de sus nefastas
consecuencias}\label{descripciuxf3n-de-la-seducciuxf3n-a-la-fornicaciuxf3n-aduxfaltera-advertencia-de-sus-nefastas-consecuencias}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Hijo mío, guarda mis palabras. Guarda mis mandamientos
dentro de ti. \bibleverse{2} ¡Guarda mis mandamientos y vive! Guarda mi
enseñanza como la niña de tus ojos. \bibleverse{3} Átalos en los dedos.
Escríbelos en la tabla de tu corazón. \footnote{\textbf{7:3} Prov 3,3}
\bibleverse{4} Dile a la sabiduría: ``Eres mi hermana''. Llama a la
comprensión de tu pariente, \bibleverse{5} para que te alejen de la
mujer extraña, de la extranjera que halaga con sus palabras. \footnote{\textbf{7:5}
  Prov 2,16} \bibleverse{6} Pues en la ventana de mi casa, Miré a través
de mi celosía. \bibleverse{7} Vi entre los simples. Distinguí entre los
jóvenes a un joven vacío de entendimiento, \bibleverse{8} pasando por la
calle cerca de su esquina, se dirigió a su casa, \bibleverse{9} en el
crepúsculo, en la tarde del día, en medio de la noche y en la oscuridad.
\bibleverse{10} He aquí que le salió al encuentro una mujer con atuendo
de prostituta, y con astucia. \bibleverse{11} Es ruidosa y desafiante.
Sus pies no se quedan en su casa. \bibleverse{12} Ahora está en las
calles, ahora en las plazas, y acechando en cada esquina.
\bibleverse{13} Entonces ella lo agarró y lo besó. Con una cara impúdica
le dijo: \bibleverse{14} ``Los sacrificios de ofrendas de paz están
conmigo. Hoy he pagado mis votos. \footnote{\textbf{7:14} Lev 3,3-4}
\bibleverse{15} Por eso salí a tu encuentro, para buscar diligentemente
tu rostro, y te he encontrado. \bibleverse{16} He extendido mi sofá con
alfombras de tapiz, con telas rayadas del hilo de Egipto.
\bibleverse{17} He perfumado mi cama con mirra, áloe y canela.
\bibleverse{18} Ven, vamos a saciarnos de amor hasta la mañana.
Consolémonos con el amor. \bibleverse{19} Porque mi marido no está en
casa. Ha hecho un largo viaje. \bibleverse{20} Se ha llevado una bolsa
de dinero. Volverá a casa con la luna llena''. \bibleverse{21} Con
palabras persuasivas, ella lo desvió. Con el halago de sus labios, lo
sedujo. \bibleverse{22} La siguió inmediatamente, como un buey va al
matadero, como un tonto que se mete en un lazo. \bibleverse{23} Hasta
que una flecha le atraviese el hígado, como un pájaro se apresura a la
trampa, y no sabe que le costará la vida. \bibleverse{24} Ahora, pues,
hijos, escuchadme. Presta atención a las palabras de mi boca.
\bibleverse{25} No dejes que tu corazón se vuelva hacia sus caminos. No
te desvíes de sus caminos, \bibleverse{26} porque ha arrojado muchos
heridos. Sí, todos sus muertos son un poderoso ejército. \bibleverse{27}
Su casa es el camino al Seol, \footnote{\textbf{7:27} El Seol es el
  lugar de los muertos.} bajando a las habitaciones de la muerte.
\footnote{\textbf{7:27} Prov 2,18-19}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{description-of-seduction-to-adulterous-fornication-warning-of-its-dire-consequences}{%
\subsection{Description of seduction to adulterous fornication; Warning
of its dire
consequences}\label{description-of-seduction-to-adulterous-fornication-warning-of-its-dire-consequences}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, keep my words. Lay up my commandments within you.
\bibleverse{2} Keep my commandments and live! Guard my teaching as the
apple of your eye. \bibleverse{3} Bind them on your fingers. Write them
on the tablet of your heart. \bibleverse{4} Tell wisdom, ``You are my
sister.'' Call understanding your relative, \bibleverse{5} that they may
keep you from the strange woman, from the foreigner who flatters with
her words. \bibleverse{6} For at the window of my house, I looked out
through my lattice. \bibleverse{7} I saw among the simple ones. I
discerned among the youths a young man void of understanding,
\bibleverse{8} passing through the street near her corner, he went the
way to her house, \bibleverse{9} in the twilight, in the evening of the
day, in the middle of the night and in the darkness. \bibleverse{10}
Behold, there a woman met him with the attire of a prostitute, and with
crafty intent. \bibleverse{11} She is loud and defiant. Her feet don't
stay in her house. \bibleverse{12} Now she is in the streets, now in the
squares, and lurking at every corner. \bibleverse{13} So she caught him,
and kissed him. With an impudent face she said to him: \bibleverse{14}
``Sacrifices of peace offerings are with me. Today I have paid my vows.
\bibleverse{15} Therefore I came out to meet you, to diligently seek
your face, and I have found you. \bibleverse{16} I have spread my couch
with carpets of tapestry, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.
\bibleverse{17} I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
\bibleverse{18} Come, let's take our fill of loving until the morning.
Let's solace ourselves with loving. \bibleverse{19} For my husband isn't
at home. He has gone on a long journey. \bibleverse{20} He has taken a
bag of money with him. He will come home at the full moon.''
\bibleverse{21} With persuasive words, she led him astray. With the
flattering of her lips, she seduced him. \bibleverse{22} He followed her
immediately, as an ox goes to the slaughter, as a fool stepping into a
noose. \bibleverse{23} Until an arrow strikes through his liver, as a
bird hurries to the snare, and doesn't know that it will cost his life.
\bibleverse{24} Now therefore, sons, listen to me. Pay attention to the
words of my mouth. \bibleverse{25} Don't let your heart turn to her
ways. Don't go astray in her paths, \bibleverse{26} for she has thrown
down many wounded. Yes, all her slain are a mighty army. \bibleverse{27}
Her house is the way to Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{7:27} Sheol is the place
  of the dead.} going down to the rooms of death.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{invitaciuxf3n-y-auto-recomendaciuxf3n-de-la-sabiduruxeda-como-docente}{%
\subsection{Invitación y auto recomendación de la sabiduría como
docente}\label{invitaciuxf3n-y-auto-recomendaciuxf3n-de-la-sabiduruxeda-como-docente}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} ¿No grita la sabiduría? ¿La comprensión no levanta la
voz? \footnote{\textbf{8:1} Prov 1,20-33} \bibleverse{2} En la cima de
los lugares altos por cierto, donde los caminos se encuentran, ella se
para. \bibleverse{3} Junto a las puertas, a la entrada de la ciudad, en
las puertas de entrada, llora en voz alta: \bibleverse{4} ``¡Os llamo a
vosotros, hombres! Envío mi voz a los hijos de la humanidad.
\bibleverse{5} ¡Tú, simple, entiende la prudencia! ¡Necios, tened un
corazón comprensivo! \bibleverse{6} Escuchad, porque voy a hablar de
cosas excelentes. La apertura de mis labios es para las cosas correctas.
\bibleverse{7} Porque mi boca dice la verdad. La maldad es una
abominación para mis labios. \bibleverse{8} Todas las palabras de mi
boca son en justicia. No hay nada torcido ni perverso en ellos.
\bibleverse{9} Todo está claro para el que entiende, derecho a los que
encuentran el conocimiento. \bibleverse{10} Recibe mi instrucción antes
que la plata, conocimiento más que el oro de la elección. \footnote{\textbf{8:10}
  Prov 3,14} \bibleverse{11} Porque la sabiduría es mejor que los
rubíes. Todas las cosas que se puedan desear no se pueden comparar con
ella. \bibleverse{12} ``Yo, la sabiduría, he hecho de la prudencia mi
morada. Descubra el conocimiento y la discreción. \bibleverse{13} El
temor a Yahvé es odiar el mal. Odio el orgullo, la arrogancia, el mal
camino y la boca perversa. \footnote{\textbf{8:13} Prov 6,12-19}
\bibleverse{14} El consejo y el buen conocimiento son míos. Tengo
comprensión y poder. \bibleverse{15} Por mí reinan los reyes, y los
príncipes decretan la justicia. \footnote{\textbf{8:15} Prov 16,12; Ecl
  10,16} \bibleverse{16} Por mí gobiernan los príncipes, nobles, y todos
los gobernantes justos de la tierra. \bibleverse{17} Yo amo a los que me
aman. Los que me buscan con diligencia me encontrarán. \bibleverse{18}
Conmigo están las riquezas, el honor, riqueza duradera y prosperidad.
\bibleverse{19} Mi fruto es mejor que el oro, sí, que el oro fino, mi
rendimiento que la plata de elección. \bibleverse{20} Yo ando en el
camino de la justicia, en medio de los caminos de la justicia,
\bibleverse{21} para dar riqueza a los que me aman. Lleno sus tesoros.

\hypertarget{la-sabiduruxeda-como-primera-y-muxe1s-excelente-criatura-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La sabiduría como primera y más excelente criatura de
Dios}\label{la-sabiduruxeda-como-primera-y-muxe1s-excelente-criatura-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{22} ``Yahvé me poseyó en el comienzo de su obra, ante sus
hazañas de antaño. \footnote{\textbf{8:22} Job 28,27} \bibleverse{23}
Fui establecido desde siempre, desde el principio, antes de que la
tierra existiera. \bibleverse{24} Cuando no había profundidades, nací
yo, cuando no había manantiales que abundaran en agua. \bibleverse{25}
Antes de que las montañas se asentaran en su lugar, antes de las
colinas, nací yo; \bibleverse{26} cuando aún no había hecho la tierra ni
los campos, ni el principio del polvo del mundo. \bibleverse{27} Cuando
estableció los cielos, yo estaba allí. Cuando estableció un círculo en
la superficie de las profundidades, \footnote{\textbf{8:27} Job 26,10}
\bibleverse{28} cuando estableció las nubes de arriba, cuando los
manantiales de las profundidades se hicieron fuertes, \bibleverse{29}
cuando le dio al mar su límite, para que las aguas no violen su
mandamiento, cuando marcó los cimientos de la tierra, \footnote{\textbf{8:29}
  Job 38,10-11; Sal 104,9} \bibleverse{30} entonces yo era el artesano a
su lado. Era una delicia día a día, siempre regocijándose ante él,
\bibleverse{31} regocijo en todo su mundo. Mi deleite fue con los hijos
de los hombres. \footnote{\textbf{8:31} Deut 33,3}

\hypertarget{recordatorio-y-advertencia}{%
\subsection{Recordatorio y
advertencia}\label{recordatorio-y-advertencia}}

\bibleverse{32} ``Ahora, pues, hijos míos, escuchadme, porque son
dichosos los que guardan mis caminos. \bibleverse{33} Escucha la
instrucción y sé sabio. No lo rechaces. \bibleverse{34} Dichoso el
hombre que me escucha, vigilando diariamente a mis puertas, esperando en
los puestos de mi puerta. \bibleverse{35} Porque quien me encuentra,
encuentra la vida, y obtendrá el favor de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{8:35}
  Prov 3,2} \bibleverse{36} Pero el que peca contra mí hace daño a su
propia alma. Todos los que me odian aman la muerte''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{invitation-and-self-recommendation-of-wisdom-as-a-teacher}{%
\subsection{Invitation and self-recommendation of wisdom as a
teacher}\label{invitation-and-self-recommendation-of-wisdom-as-a-teacher}}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} Doesn't wisdom cry out? Doesn't understanding raise her
voice? \bibleverse{2} On the top of high places by the way, where the
paths meet, she stands. \bibleverse{3} Beside the gates, at the entry of
the city, at the entry doors, she cries aloud: \bibleverse{4} ``I call
to you men! I send my voice to the sons of mankind. \bibleverse{5} You
simple, understand prudence! You fools, be of an understanding heart!
\bibleverse{6} Hear, for I will speak excellent things. The opening of
my lips is for right things. \bibleverse{7} For my mouth speaks truth.
Wickedness is an abomination to my lips. \bibleverse{8} All the words of
my mouth are in righteousness. There is nothing crooked or perverse in
them. \bibleverse{9} They are all plain to him who understands, right to
those who find knowledge. \bibleverse{10} Receive my instruction rather
than silver, knowledge rather than choice gold. \bibleverse{11} For
wisdom is better than rubies. All the things that may be desired can't
be compared to it. \bibleverse{12} ``I, wisdom, have made prudence my
dwelling. Find out knowledge and discretion. \bibleverse{13} The fear of
Yahweh is to hate evil. I hate pride, arrogance, the evil way, and the
perverse mouth. \bibleverse{14} Counsel and sound knowledge are mine. I
have understanding and power. \bibleverse{15} By me kings reign, and
princes decree justice. \bibleverse{16} By me princes rule, nobles, and
all the righteous rulers of the earth. \bibleverse{17} I love those who
love me. Those who seek me diligently will find me. \bibleverse{18} With
me are riches, honor, enduring wealth, and prosperity. \bibleverse{19}
My fruit is better than gold, yes, than fine gold, my yield than choice
silver. \bibleverse{20} I walk in the way of righteousness, in the
middle of the paths of justice, \bibleverse{21} that I may give wealth
to those who love me. I fill their treasuries.

\hypertarget{wisdom-as-the-first-and-most-excellent-creature-of-god}{%
\subsection{Wisdom as the first and most excellent creature of
God}\label{wisdom-as-the-first-and-most-excellent-creature-of-god}}

\bibleverse{22} ``Yahweh possessed me in the beginning of his work,
before his deeds of old. \bibleverse{23} I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, before the earth existed. \bibleverse{24} When there
were no depths, I was born, when there were no springs abounding with
water. \bibleverse{25} Before the mountains were settled in place,
before the hills, I was born; \bibleverse{26} while as yet he had not
made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the
world. \bibleverse{27} When he established the heavens, I was there.
When he set a circle on the surface of the deep, \bibleverse{28} when he
established the clouds above, when the springs of the deep became
strong, \bibleverse{29} when he gave to the sea its boundary, that the
waters should not violate his commandment, when he marked out the
foundations of the earth, \bibleverse{30} then I was the craftsman by
his side. I was a delight day by day, always rejoicing before him,
\bibleverse{31} rejoicing in his whole world. My delight was with the
sons of men.

\hypertarget{reminder-and-warning}{%
\subsection{Reminder and warning}\label{reminder-and-warning}}

\bibleverse{32} ``Now therefore, my sons, listen to me, for blessed are
those who keep my ways. \bibleverse{33} Hear instruction, and be wise.
Don't refuse it. \bibleverse{34} Blessed is the man who hears me,
watching daily at my gates, waiting at my door posts. \bibleverse{35}
For whoever finds me finds life, and will obtain favor from Yahweh.
\bibleverse{36} But he who sins against me wrongs his own soul. All
those who hate me love death.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-sra.-sabiduria-y-la-sra.-locura-invitan-a-los-invitados}{%
\subsection{La Sra. Sabiduria y la Sra. Locura invitan a los
invitados}\label{la-sra.-sabiduria-y-la-sra.-locura-invitan-a-los-invitados}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} La sabiduría ha construido su casa. Ella ha esculpido sus
siete pilares. \bibleverse{2} Ella ha preparado su carne. Ha mezclado su
vino. También ha puesto su mesa. \footnote{\textbf{9:2} Mat 22,4}
\bibleverse{3} Ha enviado a sus doncellas. Llora desde los lugares más
altos de la ciudad: \bibleverse{4} ``¡El que sea sencillo, que se meta
aquí!''En cuanto al que está vacío de entendimiento, le dice,
\bibleverse{5} ``Ven, come un poco de mi pan, ¡Bebe un poco del vino que
he mezclado! \bibleverse{6} Deja tus costumbres sencillas y vive. Camina
por el camino del entendimiento''. \footnote{\textbf{9:6} Prov 1,22}
\bibleverse{7} El que corrige a un burlón invita al insulto. Quien
reprende a un malvado invita al abuso. \bibleverse{8} No reprendas al
burlón, para que no te odie. Reprende a una persona sabia, y te amará.
\footnote{\textbf{9:8} Prov 23,9} \bibleverse{9} Instruye a una persona
sabia, y será aún más sabia. Enseña a una persona justa, y aumentará su
aprendizaje. \bibleverse{10} El temor de Yahvé es el principio de la
sabiduría. El conocimiento del Santo es la comprensión. \footnote{\textbf{9:10}
  Prov 1,7} \bibleverse{11} Porque por mí se multiplicarán tus días. Los
años de tu vida se incrementarán. \footnote{\textbf{9:11} Prov 3,2; Prov
  3,16} \bibleverse{12} Si eres sabio, eres sabio por ti mismo. Si te
burlas, sólo tú lo soportarás.

\hypertarget{la-invitaciuxf3n-a-la-locura}{%
\subsection{La invitación a la
locura}\label{la-invitaciuxf3n-a-la-locura}}

\bibleverse{13} La mujer tonta es ruidosa, indisciplinado, y no sabe
nada. \bibleverse{14} Se sienta a la puerta de su casa, en un asiento en
los lugares altos de la ciudad, \bibleverse{15} para llamar a los que
pasan, que siguen su camino, \bibleverse{16} ``El que sea sencillo, que
se meta aquí''. En cuanto a aquel que está vacío de entendimiento, ella
le dice, \bibleverse{17} ``El agua robada es dulce. La comida que se
come en secreto es agradable''. \footnote{\textbf{9:17} Prov 20,17}
\bibleverse{18} Pero no sabe que los espíritus difuntos están allí, que
sus invitados están en las profundidades del Seol. \footnote{\textbf{9:18}
  El Seol es el lugar de los muertos.}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{mrs.-wisdom-and-mrs.-madness-invite-guests}{%
\subsection{Mrs. Wisdom and Mrs. Madness invite
guests}\label{mrs.-wisdom-and-mrs.-madness-invite-guests}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} Wisdom has built her house. She has carved out her seven
pillars. \bibleverse{2} She has prepared her meat. She has mixed her
wine. She has also set her table. \bibleverse{3} She has sent out her
maidens. She cries from the highest places of the city: \bibleverse{4}
``Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!'' As for him who is void of
understanding, she says to him, \bibleverse{5} ``Come, eat some of my
bread, Drink some of the wine which I have mixed! \bibleverse{6} Leave
your simple ways, and live. Walk in the way of understanding.''
\bibleverse{7} One who corrects a mocker invites insult. One who
reproves a wicked man invites abuse. \bibleverse{8} Don't reprove a
scoffer, lest he hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.
\bibleverse{9} Instruct a wise person, and he will be still wiser. Teach
a righteous person, and he will increase in learning. \bibleverse{10}
The fear of Yahweh is the beginning of wisdom. The knowledge of the Holy
One is understanding. \bibleverse{11} For by me your days will be
multiplied. The years of your life will be increased. \bibleverse{12} If
you are wise, you are wise for yourself. If you mock, you alone will
bear it.

\hypertarget{the-invitation-to-madness}{%
\subsection{The invitation to madness}\label{the-invitation-to-madness}}

\bibleverse{13} The foolish woman is loud, undisciplined, and knows
nothing. \bibleverse{14} She sits at the door of her house, on a seat in
the high places of the city, \bibleverse{15} to call to those who pass
by, who go straight on their ways, \bibleverse{16} ``Whoever is simple,
let him turn in here.'' As for him who is void of understanding, she
says to him, \bibleverse{17} ``Stolen water is sweet. Food eaten in
secret is pleasant.'' \bibleverse{18} But he doesn't know that the
departed spirits are there, that her guests are in the depths of
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{9:18} Sheol is the place of the dead.}

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Los proverbios de Salomón. Un hijo sabio hace un padre
feliz; pero un hijo insensato trae dolor a su madre. \footnote{\textbf{10:1}
  Prov 15,20; Prov 17,21; Prov 17,25} \bibleverse{2} Los tesoros de la
maldad no aprovechan nada, pero la justicia libra de la muerte.
\bibleverse{3} Yahvé no permitirá que el alma del justo pase hambre,
pero aleja el deseo de los malvados. \footnote{\textbf{10:3} Sal 37,19;
  Sal 37,25} \bibleverse{4} Se hace pobre el que trabaja con mano
perezosa, pero la mano del diligente trae riqueza. \footnote{\textbf{10:4}
  Prov 6,6-11; Prov 12,24; Prov 12,27; Prov 19,15; Prov 28,19}
\bibleverse{5} El que recoge en verano es un hijo sabio, pero el que
duerme durante la cosecha es un hijo que causa vergüenza. \bibleverse{6}
Las bendiciones están en la cabeza de los justos, pero la violencia
cubre la boca de los malvados. \bibleverse{7} La memoria de los justos
es bendita, pero el nombre de los malvados se pudrirá. \footnote{\textbf{10:7}
  Job 18,17; Sal 9,5} \bibleverse{8} Los sabios de corazón aceptan los
mandamientos, pero un tonto parlanchín caerá. \bibleverse{9} El que
camina sin culpa, camina con seguridad, pero el que pervierte sus
caminos será descubierto. \bibleverse{10} El que guiña el ojo causa
dolor, pero un tonto parlanchín caerá. \footnote{\textbf{10:10} Prov
  6,13} \bibleverse{11} La boca del justo es un manantial de vida, pero
la violencia cubre la boca de los malvados. \footnote{\textbf{10:11}
  Prov 10,31; Prov 13,14} \bibleverse{12} El odio suscita conflictos,
pero el amor cubre todos los males. \footnote{\textbf{10:12} 1Pe 4,8}
\bibleverse{13} La sabiduría se encuentra en los labios del que tiene
discernimiento, pero la vara es para la espalda del que no tiene
entendimiento. \bibleverse{14} Los sabios acumulan conocimientos, pero
la boca del necio está cerca de la ruina. \bibleverse{15} La riqueza del
rico es su ciudad fuerte. La destrucción de los pobres es su pobreza.
\footnote{\textbf{10:15} Prov 18,11} \bibleverse{16} El trabajo de los
justos conduce a la vida. El aumento de los malvados lleva al pecado.
\footnote{\textbf{10:16} Luc 16,19} \bibleverse{17} Está en el camino de
la vida quien hace caso a la corrección, pero el que abandona la
reprensión extravía a los demás. \bibleverse{18} El que oculta el odio
tiene labios mentirosos. El que profiere una calumnia es un necio.
\bibleverse{19} En la multitud de palabras no falta la desobediencia,
pero el que refrena sus labios lo hace con sabiduría. \bibleverse{20} La
lengua del justo es como la plata selecta. El corazón de los malvados es
de poco valor. \bibleverse{21} Los labios de los justos alimentan a
muchos, pero los necios mueren por falta de entendimiento.
\bibleverse{22} La bendición de Yahvé trae riqueza, y no le añade ningún
problema. \footnote{\textbf{10:22} Sal 127,2} \bibleverse{23} El placer
del necio es hacer la maldad, pero la sabiduría es un hombre de placer
del entendimiento. \bibleverse{24} Lo que los malvados temen los
alcanzará, pero el deseo de los justos será concedido. \footnote{\textbf{10:24}
  Prov 1,27; Sal 37,4} \bibleverse{25} Cuando el torbellino pasa, el
malvado ya no existe; pero los justos se mantienen firmes para siempre.
\bibleverse{26} Como vinagre a los dientes y como humo a los ojos, así
es el perezoso para los que lo envían. \bibleverse{27} El temor a Yahvé
prolonga los días, pero los años de los impíos serán acortados.
\footnote{\textbf{10:27} Prov 9,11; Prov 14,27} \bibleverse{28} La
perspectiva de los justos es la alegría, pero la esperanza de los
malvados perecerá. \footnote{\textbf{10:28} Sal 9,18; Job 8,13}
\bibleverse{29} El camino de Yahvé es una fortaleza para los rectos,
sino que es una destrucción para los obreros de la iniquidad.
\footnote{\textbf{10:29} Prov 3,26} \bibleverse{30} Los justos nunca
serán eliminados, pero los malvados no habitarán la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{10:30}
  Sal 112,6; Prov 2,22} \bibleverse{31} La boca del justo produce
sabiduría, pero la lengua perversa será cortada. \footnote{\textbf{10:31}
  Prov 10,11; Sal 37,30} \bibleverse{32} Los labios de los justos saben
lo que es aceptable, pero la boca de los malvados es perversa.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes a glad father;
but a foolish son brings grief to his mother. \bibleverse{2} Treasures
of wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivers from death.
\bibleverse{3} Yahweh will not allow the soul of the righteous to go
hungry, but he thrusts away the desire of the wicked. \bibleverse{4} He
becomes poor who works with a lazy hand, but the hand of the diligent
brings wealth. \bibleverse{5} He who gathers in summer is a wise son,
but he who sleeps during the harvest is a son who causes shame.
\bibleverse{6} Blessings are on the head of the righteous, but violence
covers the mouth of the wicked. \bibleverse{7} The memory of the
righteous is blessed, but the name of the wicked will rot.
\bibleverse{8} The wise in heart accept commandments, but a chattering
fool will fall. \bibleverse{9} He who walks blamelessly walks surely,
but he who perverts his ways will be found out. \bibleverse{10} One who
winks with the eye causes sorrow, but a chattering fool will fall.
\bibleverse{11} The mouth of the righteous is a spring of life, but
violence covers the mouth of the wicked. \bibleverse{12} Hatred stirs up
strife, but love covers all wrongs. \bibleverse{13} Wisdom is found on
the lips of him who has discernment, but a rod is for the back of him
who is void of understanding. \bibleverse{14} Wise men lay up knowledge,
but the mouth of the foolish is near ruin. \bibleverse{15} The rich
man's wealth is his strong city. The destruction of the poor is their
poverty. \bibleverse{16} The labor of the righteous leads to life. The
increase of the wicked leads to sin. \bibleverse{17} He is in the way of
life who heeds correction, but he who forsakes reproof leads others
astray. \bibleverse{18} He who hides hatred has lying lips. He who
utters a slander is a fool. \bibleverse{19} In the multitude of words
there is no lack of disobedience, but he who restrains his lips does
wisely. \bibleverse{20} The tongue of the righteous is like choice
silver. The heart of the wicked is of little worth. \bibleverse{21} The
lips of the righteous feed many, but the foolish die for lack of
understanding. \bibleverse{22} Yahweh's blessing brings wealth, and he
adds no trouble to it. \bibleverse{23} It is a fool's pleasure to do
wickedness, but wisdom is a man of understanding's pleasure.
\bibleverse{24} What the wicked fear will overtake them, but the desire
of the righteous will be granted. \bibleverse{25} When the whirlwind
passes, the wicked is no more; but the righteous stand firm forever.
\bibleverse{26} As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is
the sluggard to those who send him. \bibleverse{27} The fear of Yahweh
prolongs days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
\bibleverse{28} The prospect of the righteous is joy, but the hope of
the wicked will perish. \bibleverse{29} The way of Yahweh is a
stronghold to the upright, but it is a destruction to the workers of
iniquity. \bibleverse{30} The righteous will never be removed, but the
wicked will not dwell in the land. \bibleverse{31} The mouth of the
righteous produces wisdom, but the perverse tongue will be cut off.
\bibleverse{32} The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, but
the mouth of the wicked is perverse.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Un balance falso es una abominación para Yahvé, pero las
pesas precisas son su deleite. \footnote{\textbf{11:1} Prov 16,11; Prov
  20,10; Lev 19,35} \bibleverse{2} Cuando llega el orgullo, llega la
vergüenza, pero con la humildad viene la sabiduría. \footnote{\textbf{11:2}
  Prov 16,18; Prov 18,12} \bibleverse{3} La integridad de los rectos los
guiará, pero la perversidad de los traidores los destruirá. \footnote{\textbf{11:3}
  Sal 52,5} \bibleverse{4} Las riquezas no aprovechan en el día de la
ira, pero la justicia libra de la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{11:4} Prov
  10,2} \bibleverse{5} La justicia del intachable dirigirá su camino,
pero el impío caerá por su propia maldad. \bibleverse{6} La justicia de
los rectos los librará, pero los infieles quedarán atrapados por los
malos deseos. \bibleverse{7} Cuando un malvado muere, la esperanza
perece, y la expectativa de poder se queda en nada. \footnote{\textbf{11:7}
  Prov 10,28} \bibleverse{8} El justo es liberado de la angustia, y el
malvado ocupa su lugar. \footnote{\textbf{11:8} Prov 21,18; Is 43,3}
\bibleverse{9} Con su boca el impío destruye a su prójimo, pero los
justos serán liberados a través del conocimiento. \bibleverse{10} Cuando
le va bien al justo, la ciudad se alegra. Cuando los malvados perecen,
hay gritos. \bibleverse{11} Por la bendición de los rectos, la ciudad es
exaltada, pero es derribado por la boca de los malvados. \footnote{\textbf{11:11}
  Prov 28,12; Prov 29,2} \bibleverse{12} El que desprecia a su prójimo
está vacío de sabiduría, pero un hombre comprensivo mantiene su paz.
\bibleverse{13} El que trae chismes traiciona una confianza, pero el que
tiene un espíritu de confianza es el que guarda un secreto.
\bibleverse{14} Donde no hay una guía sabia, la nación cae, pero en la
multitud de consejeros está la victoria. \bibleverse{15} El que es
garante de un extraño sufrirá por ello, pero el que rechaza las prendas
de garantía está seguro. \footnote{\textbf{11:15} Prov 6,1-2}
\bibleverse{16} Una mujer con gracia obtiene honor, pero los hombres
violentos obtienen riquezas. \bibleverse{17} El hombre misericordioso
hace el bien a su propia alma, pero el que es cruel molesta a su propia
carne. \bibleverse{18} Los malvados ganan sueldos engañosos, pero el que
siembra justicia cosecha una recompensa segura. \bibleverse{19} El que
es verdaderamente justo obtiene la vida. El que persigue el mal obtiene
la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{11:19} Prov 19,23} \bibleverse{20} Los
perversos de corazón son una abominación para Yahvé, pero aquellos cuyos
caminos son intachables son su deleite. \bibleverse{21} Ciertamente, el
hombre malo no quedará impune, pero la descendencia\footnote{\textbf{11:21}
  o, semilla} de los justos será liberada. \bibleverse{22} Como un
anillo de oro en el hocico de un cerdo, es una hermosa mujer que carece
de discreción. \footnote{\textbf{11:22} Prov 31,30} \bibleverse{23} El
deseo de los justos es sólo bueno. La expectativa de los malvados es la
ira. \footnote{\textbf{11:23} Prov 11,7} \bibleverse{24} Hay uno que
dispersa y aumenta aún más. Hay uno que retiene más de lo debido, pero
gana la pobreza. \bibleverse{25} El alma liberal será engordada. El que
riega será también regado. \footnote{\textbf{11:25} Prov 19,17}
\bibleverse{26} La gente maldice a quien retiene el grano, pero la
bendición caerá sobre la cabeza de quien lo venda. \bibleverse{27} El
que busca diligentemente el bien, busca el favor, pero el que busca el
mal, éste vendrá a él. \bibleverse{28} El que confía en sus riquezas
caerá, pero el justo florecerá como la hoja verde. \footnote{\textbf{11:28}
  Sal 52,7-8} \bibleverse{29} El que molesta a su propia casa heredará
el viento. El necio servirá al sabio de corazón. \bibleverse{30} El
fruto del justo es un árbol de vida. El que es sabio gana almas.
\footnote{\textbf{11:30} Prov 3,18; Prov 15,4} \bibleverse{31} He aquí
que los justos serán recompensados en la tierra, ¡cuanto más el malvado
y el pecador! \footnote{\textbf{11:31} 1Pe 4,17-18}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} A false balance is an abomination to Yahweh, but accurate
weights are his delight. \bibleverse{2} When pride comes, then comes
shame, but with humility comes wisdom. \bibleverse{3} The integrity of
the upright shall guide them, but the perverseness of the treacherous
shall destroy them. \bibleverse{4} Riches don't profit in the day of
wrath, but righteousness delivers from death. \bibleverse{5} The
righteousness of the blameless will direct his way, but the wicked shall
fall by his own wickedness. \bibleverse{6} The righteousness of the
upright shall deliver them, but the unfaithful will be trapped by evil
desires. \bibleverse{7} When a wicked man dies, hope perishes, and
expectation of power comes to nothing. \bibleverse{8} A righteous person
is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked takes his place.
\bibleverse{9} With his mouth the godless man destroys his neighbor, but
the righteous will be delivered through knowledge. \bibleverse{10} When
it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices. When the wicked
perish, there is shouting. \bibleverse{11} By the blessing of the
upright, the city is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the
wicked. \bibleverse{12} One who despises his neighbor is void of wisdom,
but a man of understanding holds his peace. \bibleverse{13} One who
brings gossip betrays a confidence, but one who is of a trustworthy
spirit is one who keeps a secret. \bibleverse{14} Where there is no wise
guidance, the nation falls, but in the multitude of counselors there is
victory. \bibleverse{15} He who is collateral for a stranger will suffer
for it, but he who refuses pledges of collateral is secure.
\bibleverse{16} A gracious woman obtains honor, but violent men obtain
riches. \bibleverse{17} The merciful man does good to his own soul, but
he who is cruel troubles his own flesh. \bibleverse{18} Wicked people
earn deceitful wages, but one who sows righteousness reaps a sure
reward. \bibleverse{19} He who is truly righteous gets life. He who
pursues evil gets death. \bibleverse{20} Those who are perverse in heart
are an abomination to Yahweh, but those whose ways are blameless are his
delight. \bibleverse{21} Most certainly, the evil man will not be
unpunished, but the offspring\footnote{\textbf{11:21} or, seed} of the
righteous will be delivered. \bibleverse{22} Like a gold ring in a pig's
snout, is a beautiful woman who lacks discretion. \bibleverse{23} The
desire of the righteous is only good. The expectation of the wicked is
wrath. \bibleverse{24} There is one who scatters, and increases yet
more. There is one who withholds more than is appropriate, but gains
poverty. \bibleverse{25} The liberal soul shall be made fat. He who
waters shall be watered also himself. \bibleverse{26} People curse
someone who withholds grain, but blessing will be on the head of him who
sells it. \bibleverse{27} He who diligently seeks good seeks favor, but
he who searches after evil, it shall come to him. \bibleverse{28} He who
trusts in his riches will fall, but the righteous shall flourish as the
green leaf. \bibleverse{29} He who troubles his own house shall inherit
the wind. The foolish shall be servant to the wise of heart.
\bibleverse{30} The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life. He who is
wise wins souls. \bibleverse{31} Behold, the righteous shall be repaid
in the earth, how much more the wicked and the sinner!

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Quien ama la corrección ama el conocimiento, pero el que
odia la reprensión es un estúpido. \footnote{\textbf{12:1} Prov 13,1;
  Prov 13,18} \bibleverse{2} El hombre bueno obtendrá el favor de Yahvé,
pero condenará a un hombre de planes malvados. \bibleverse{3} El hombre
no será establecido por la maldad, pero la raíz de los justos no se
moverá. \footnote{\textbf{12:3} Prov 12,12} \bibleverse{4} Una mujer
digna es la corona de su marido, pero una esposa desgraciada es como la
podredumbre en sus huesos. \footnote{\textbf{12:4} Prov 31,10-31}
\bibleverse{5} Los pensamientos del justo son justos, pero el consejo de
los malvados es engañoso. \footnote{\textbf{12:5} 1Re 12,6-19}
\bibleverse{6} Las palabras de los malvados consisten en acechar la
sangre, pero el discurso de los rectos los rescata. \bibleverse{7} Los
malvados son derribados y ya no existen, pero la casa de los justos
permanecerá. \footnote{\textbf{12:7} Prov 10,25; Job 8,13-19}
\bibleverse{8} El hombre será alabado según su sabiduría, pero el que
tiene una mente torcida será despreciado. \bibleverse{9} Mejor es el que
es poco conocido, y tiene un servidor, que el que se honra y carece de
pan. \bibleverse{10} El hombre justo respeta la vida de su animal, pero
la misericordia de los malvados es cruel. \footnote{\textbf{12:10} Éxod
  23,5} \bibleverse{11} El que cultiva su tierra tendrá pan en
abundancia, pero el que persigue fantasías está vacío de entendimiento.
\footnote{\textbf{12:11} Prov 28,19} \bibleverse{12} El malvado desea el
botín de los hombres malos, pero la raíz de los justos florece.
\footnote{\textbf{12:12} Prov 12,3} \bibleverse{13} Un hombre malvado
está atrapado por el pecado de los labios, pero los justos saldrán de
las dificultades. \bibleverse{14} El hombre será satisfecho con el bien
por el fruto de su boca. El trabajo de las manos del hombre le será
recompensado. \footnote{\textbf{12:14} Rom 2,6} \bibleverse{15} El
camino del necio es correcto a sus propios ojos, pero el que es sabio
escucha el consejo. \bibleverse{16} Un tonto muestra su fastidio el
mismo día, pero quien pasa por alto un insulto es prudente.
\bibleverse{17} El que es veraz testifica con honestidad, pero un
testigo falso miente. \bibleverse{18} Hay uno que habla con imprudencia,
como el que atraviesa una espada, pero la lengua del sabio sana.
\footnote{\textbf{12:18} Prov 13,3} \bibleverse{19} Los labios de la
verdad se establecerán para siempre, pero una lengua mentirosa es sólo
momentánea. \bibleverse{20} El engaño está en el corazón de los que
traman el mal, pero la alegría llega a los promotores de la paz.
\bibleverse{21} Al justo no le sucederá ningún mal, pero los malvados se
llenarán de maldad. \bibleverse{22} Los labios mentirosos son una
abominación para Yahvé, pero los que hacen la verdad son su deleite.
\footnote{\textbf{12:22} Prov 6,17} \bibleverse{23} El hombre prudente
guarda sus conocimientos, pero el corazón de los necios proclama la
necedad. \footnote{\textbf{12:23} Prov 29,11} \bibleverse{24} Las manos
de los diligentes gobernarán, pero la pereza termina en trabajo esclavo.
\footnote{\textbf{12:24} Prov 10,4} \bibleverse{25} La ansiedad en el
corazón del hombre lo agobia, pero una palabra amable lo alegra.
\footnote{\textbf{12:25} Prov 16,24} \bibleverse{26} Una persona justa
es prudente en la amistad, pero el camino de los malvados los extravía.
\bibleverse{27} El perezoso no asa su juego, pero las posesiones de los
hombres diligentes son apreciadas. \footnote{\textbf{12:27} Prov 12,24}
\bibleverse{28} En el camino de la justicia está la vida; en su camino
no hay muerte.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Whoever loves correction loves knowledge, but he who
hates reproof is stupid. \bibleverse{2} A good man shall obtain favor
from Yahweh, but he will condemn a man of wicked plans. \bibleverse{3} A
man shall not be established by wickedness, but the root of the
righteous shall not be moved. \bibleverse{4} A worthy woman is the crown
of her husband, but a disgraceful wife is as rottenness in his bones.
\bibleverse{5} The thoughts of the righteous are just, but the advice of
the wicked is deceitful. \bibleverse{6} The words of the wicked are
about lying in wait for blood, but the speech of the upright rescues
them. \bibleverse{7} The wicked are overthrown, and are no more, but the
house of the righteous shall stand. \bibleverse{8} A man shall be
commended according to his wisdom, but he who has a warped mind shall be
despised. \bibleverse{9} Better is he who is little known, and has a
servant, than he who honors himself and lacks bread. \bibleverse{10} A
righteous man respects the life of his animal, but the tender mercies of
the wicked are cruel. \bibleverse{11} He who tills his land shall have
plenty of bread, but he who chases fantasies is void of understanding.
\bibleverse{12} The wicked desires the plunder of evil men, but the root
of the righteous flourishes. \bibleverse{13} An evil man is trapped by
sinfulness of lips, but the righteous shall come out of trouble.
\bibleverse{14} A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his
mouth. The work of a man's hands shall be rewarded to him.
\bibleverse{15} The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he who
is wise listens to counsel. \bibleverse{16} A fool shows his annoyance
the same day, but one who overlooks an insult is prudent.
\bibleverse{17} He who is truthful testifies honestly, but a false
witness lies. \bibleverse{18} There is one who speaks rashly like the
piercing of a sword, but the tongue of the wise heals. \bibleverse{19}
Truth's lips will be established forever, but a lying tongue is only
momentary. \bibleverse{20} Deceit is in the heart of those who plot
evil, but joy comes to the promoters of peace. \bibleverse{21} No
mischief shall happen to the righteous, but the wicked shall be filled
with evil. \bibleverse{22} Lying lips are an abomination to Yahweh, but
those who do the truth are his delight. \bibleverse{23} A prudent man
keeps his knowledge, but the hearts of fools proclaim foolishness.
\bibleverse{24} The hands of the diligent ones shall rule, but laziness
ends in slave labor. \bibleverse{25} Anxiety in a man's heart weighs it
down, but a kind word makes it glad. \bibleverse{26} A righteous person
is cautious in friendship, but the way of the wicked leads them astray.
\bibleverse{27} The slothful man doesn't roast his game, but the
possessions of diligent men are prized. \bibleverse{28} In the way of
righteousness is life; in its path there is no death.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{13}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Un hijo sabio escucha la instrucción de su padre, pero un
burlón no escucha la reprimenda. \footnote{\textbf{13:1} Prov 1,8; Prov
  12,1} \bibleverse{2} Por el fruto de sus labios, el hombre disfruta de
las cosas buenas, pero los infieles ansían la violencia. \footnote{\textbf{13:2}
  Prov 12,14} \bibleverse{3} El que guarda su boca guarda su alma. El
que abre mucho los labios se arruina. \footnote{\textbf{13:3} Prov
  12,18; Prov 21,23} \bibleverse{4} El alma del perezoso desea y no
tiene nada, pero el deseo de los diligentes será plenamente satisfecho.
\footnote{\textbf{13:4} Prov 10,4} \bibleverse{5} El hombre justo odia
la mentira, pero un hombre malvado trae vergüenza y desgracia.
\bibleverse{6} La justicia guarda el camino de la integridad, pero la
maldad derriba al pecador. \bibleverse{7} Hay quienes pretenden ser
ricos, pero no tienen nada. Hay algunos que fingen ser pobres, pero
tienen grandes riquezas. \footnote{\textbf{13:7} Mat 5,3; Apoc 2,9; Apoc
  3,17} \bibleverse{8} El rescate de la vida de un hombre es su riqueza,
pero los pobres no escuchan las amenazas. \bibleverse{9} La luz de los
justos brilla con fuerza, pero la lámpara de los malvados se apaga.
\footnote{\textbf{13:9} Prov 24,20; Job 5,14; Job 18,5-6; Job 18,18}
\bibleverse{10} La soberbia sólo genera peleas, pero la sabiduría está
en las personas que aceptan los consejos. \footnote{\textbf{13:10} Prov
  28,25; Prov 1,5} \bibleverse{11} La riqueza obtenida de forma
deshonesta se desvanece, pero el que recoge a mano lo hace crecer.
\bibleverse{12} La esperanza postergada enferma el corazón, pero cuando
el anhelo se cumple, es un árbol de la vida. \bibleverse{13} Quien
desprecia la instrucción lo pagará, pero el que respeta una orden será
recompensado. \bibleverse{14} La enseñanza de los sabios es un manantial
de vida, para alejarse de las trampas de la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{13:14}
  Prov 10,11; Prov 14,27} \bibleverse{15} El buen entendimiento gana el
favor, pero el camino de los infieles es duro. \bibleverse{16} Todo
hombre prudente actúa desde el conocimiento, pero un tonto expone la
locura. \footnote{\textbf{13:16} Prov 12,23; Prov 15,2} \bibleverse{17}
Un mensajero malvado cae en problemas, pero un enviado de confianza
consigue la curación. \bibleverse{18} La pobreza y la vergüenza llegan
al que rechaza la disciplina, pero el que hace caso a la corrección será
honrado. \footnote{\textbf{13:18} Prov 12,1} \bibleverse{19} El anhelo
cumplido es dulce para el alma, pero los tontos detestan apartarse del
mal. \bibleverse{20} El que camina con los sabios se hace sabio, pero el
compañero de los tontos sufre daños. \bibleverse{21} La desgracia
persigue a los pecadores, pero la prosperidad recompensa a los justos.
\bibleverse{22} Un buen hombre deja una herencia a los hijos de sus
hijos, pero la riqueza del pecador se almacena para el justo.
\footnote{\textbf{13:22} Prov 14,14; Prov 19,1-19; Prov 28,8; Ecl 2,26}
\bibleverse{23} En los campos de los pobres hay abundancia de alimentos,
pero la injusticia la barre. \bibleverse{24} El que ahorra la vara odia
a su hijo, pero quien lo ama tiene cuidado de disciplinarlo. \footnote{\textbf{13:24}
  Prov 22,15} \bibleverse{25} El justo come para satisfacer su alma,
pero el vientre de los malvados pasa hambre. \footnote{\textbf{13:25}
  Sal 34,10}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{13}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} A wise son listens to his father's instruction, but a
scoffer doesn't listen to rebuke. \bibleverse{2} By the fruit of his
lips, a man enjoys good things, but the unfaithful crave violence.
\bibleverse{3} He who guards his mouth guards his soul. One who opens
wide his lips comes to ruin. \bibleverse{4} The soul of the sluggard
desires, and has nothing, but the desire of the diligent shall be fully
satisfied. \bibleverse{5} A righteous man hates lies, but a wicked man
brings shame and disgrace. \bibleverse{6} Righteousness guards the way
of integrity, but wickedness overthrows the sinner. \bibleverse{7} There
are some who pretend to be rich, yet have nothing. There are some who
pretend to be poor, yet have great wealth. \bibleverse{8} The ransom of
a man's life is his riches, but the poor hear no threats. \bibleverse{9}
The light of the righteous shines brightly, but the lamp of the wicked
is snuffed out. \bibleverse{10} Pride only breeds quarrels, but wisdom
is with people who take advice. \bibleverse{11} Wealth gained
dishonestly dwindles away, but he who gathers by hand makes it grow.
\bibleverse{12} Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when longing is
fulfilled, it is a tree of life. \bibleverse{13} Whoever despises
instruction will pay for it, but he who respects a command will be
rewarded. \bibleverse{14} The teaching of the wise is a spring of life,
to turn from the snares of death. \bibleverse{15} Good understanding
wins favor, but the way of the unfaithful is hard. \bibleverse{16} Every
prudent man acts from knowledge, but a fool exposes folly.
\bibleverse{17} A wicked messenger falls into trouble, but a trustworthy
envoy gains healing. \bibleverse{18} Poverty and shame come to him who
refuses discipline, but he who heeds correction shall be honored.
\bibleverse{19} Longing fulfilled is sweet to the soul, but fools detest
turning from evil. \bibleverse{20} One who walks with wise men grows
wise, but a companion of fools suffers harm. \bibleverse{21} Misfortune
pursues sinners, but prosperity rewards the righteous. \bibleverse{22} A
good man leaves an inheritance to his children's children, but the
wealth of the sinner is stored for the righteous. \bibleverse{23} An
abundance of food is in poor people's fields, but injustice sweeps it
away. \bibleverse{24} One who spares the rod hates his son, but one who
loves him is careful to discipline him. \bibleverse{25} The righteous
one eats to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked goes
hungry.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{14}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} Toda mujer sabia construye su casa, pero la insensata lo
derriba con sus propias manos. \bibleverse{2} El que camina en su
rectitud teme a Yahvé, pero el que es perverso en sus caminos lo
desprecia. \bibleverse{3} La palabrería del necio trae una vara a su
espalda, pero los labios de los sabios los protegen. \bibleverse{4}
Donde no hay bueyes, el pesebre está limpio, pero mucho aumento es por
la fuerza del buey. \bibleverse{5} Un testigo veraz no miente, pero un
testigo falso vierte mentiras. \bibleverse{6} El burlón busca la
sabiduría y no la encuentra, pero el conocimiento llega fácilmente a una
persona con criterio. \bibleverse{7} Aléjate de un hombre necio, porque
no encontrarás conocimiento en sus labios. \bibleverse{8} La sabiduría
del prudente es pensar en su camino, pero la locura de los tontos es el
engaño. \bibleverse{9} Los tontos se burlan de la expiación de los
pecados, pero entre los rectos hay buena voluntad. \bibleverse{10} El
corazón conoce su propia amargura y alegría; no los compartirá con un
extraño. \bibleverse{11} La casa de los malvados será derribada, pero la
tienda de los rectos florecerá. \footnote{\textbf{14:11} Job 18,14; Prov
  12,7} \bibleverse{12} Hay un camino que le parece correcto al hombre,
pero al final lleva a la muerte. \bibleverse{13} Incluso en la risa el
corazón puede estar triste, y la alegría puede acabar en pesadez.
\bibleverse{14} El infiel será pagado por sus propios caminos; De la
misma manera, un buen hombre será recompensado por sus caminos.
\bibleverse{15} Un hombre sencillo se lo cree todo, pero el hombre
prudente considera cuidadosamente sus caminos. \bibleverse{16} El hombre
sabio teme y evita el mal, pero el tonto es un calentón y un imprudente.
\bibleverse{17} El que se enoja rápidamente comete una locura, y un
hombre astuto es odiado. \bibleverse{18} Los simples heredan la locura,
pero los prudentes están coronados por el conocimiento. \footnote{\textbf{14:18}
  Efes 5,15} \bibleverse{19} Los malos se inclinan ante los buenos, y
los malvados a las puertas de los justos. \bibleverse{20} El pobre es
rechazado incluso por su propio vecino, pero el rico tiene muchos
amigos. \footnote{\textbf{14:20} Prov 19,4; Prov 19,7} \bibleverse{21}
El que desprecia a su prójimo peca, pero el que se apiada de los pobres
es bienaventurado. \footnote{\textbf{14:21} Sal 41,1} \bibleverse{22}
¿No se extravían los que traman el mal? Pero el amor y la fidelidad
pertenecen a los que planean el bien. \bibleverse{23} En todo trabajo
duro hay un beneficio, pero la palabrería de los labios sólo conduce a
la pobreza. \footnote{\textbf{14:23} Prov 10,4} \bibleverse{24} La
corona de los sabios es su riqueza, pero la necedad de los necios los
corona de necedad. \bibleverse{25} Un testigo veraz salva almas, pero un
testigo falso es engañoso. \footnote{\textbf{14:25} Prov 12,17}
\bibleverse{26} En el temor de Yahvé hay una fortaleza segura, y será un
refugio para sus hijos. \footnote{\textbf{14:26} Prov 18,10}
\bibleverse{27} El temor de Yahvé es una fuente de vida, apartando a la
gente de las trampas de la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{14:27} Prov 13,14}
\bibleverse{28} En la multitud del pueblo está la gloria del rey, pero
en la falta de gente está la destrucción del príncipe. \bibleverse{29}
El que es lento para la ira tiene un gran entendimiento, pero el que
tiene un temperamento rápido muestra la locura. \footnote{\textbf{14:29}
  Prov 16,32; Prov 19,11} \bibleverse{30} La vida del cuerpo es un
corazón en paz, pero la envidia pudre los huesos. \footnote{\textbf{14:30}
  Prov 12,4} \bibleverse{31} El que oprime a los pobres desprecia a su
Hacedor, pero el que es bondadoso con el necesitado lo honra.
\footnote{\textbf{14:31} Prov 17,5; Prov 19,17} \bibleverse{32} El impío
es abatido en su calamidad, pero en la muerte, el justo tiene un
refugio. \bibleverse{33} La sabiduría descansa en el corazón de quien
tiene entendimiento, y se da a conocer incluso en el interior de los
tontos. \bibleverse{34} La justicia enaltece a una nación, pero el
pecado es una desgracia para cualquier pueblo. \bibleverse{35} El favor
del rey es para el siervo que trata con sabiduría, pero su ira es hacia
el que causa vergüenza. \footnote{\textbf{14:35} Gén 41,38}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{14}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} Every wise woman builds her house, but the foolish one
tears it down with her own hands. \bibleverse{2} He who walks in his
uprightness fears Yahweh, but he who is perverse in his ways despises
him. \bibleverse{3} The fool's talk brings a rod to his back, but the
lips of the wise protect them. \bibleverse{4} Where no oxen are, the
crib is clean, but much increase is by the strength of the ox.
\bibleverse{5} A truthful witness will not lie, but a false witness
pours out lies. \bibleverse{6} A scoffer seeks wisdom, and doesn't find
it, but knowledge comes easily to a discerning person. \bibleverse{7}
Stay away from a foolish man, for you won't find knowledge on his lips.
\bibleverse{8} The wisdom of the prudent is to think about his way, but
the folly of fools is deceit. \bibleverse{9} Fools mock at making
atonement for sins, but among the upright there is good will.
\bibleverse{10} The heart knows its own bitterness and joy; he will not
share these with a stranger. \bibleverse{11} The house of the wicked
will be overthrown, but the tent of the upright will flourish.
\bibleverse{12} There is a way which seems right to a man, but in the
end it leads to death. \bibleverse{13} Even in laughter the heart may be
sorrowful, and mirth may end in heaviness. \bibleverse{14} The
unfaithful will be repaid for his own ways; likewise a good man will be
rewarded for his ways. \bibleverse{15} A simple man believes everything,
but the prudent man carefully considers his ways. \bibleverse{16} A wise
man fears and shuns evil, but the fool is hot headed and reckless.
\bibleverse{17} He who is quick to become angry will commit folly, and a
crafty man is hated. \bibleverse{18} The simple inherit folly, but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge. \bibleverse{19} The evil bow down
before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
\bibleverse{20} The poor person is shunned even by his own neighbor, but
the rich person has many friends. \bibleverse{21} He who despises his
neighbor sins, but he who has pity on the poor is blessed.
\bibleverse{22} Don't they go astray who plot evil? But love and
faithfulness belong to those who plan good. \bibleverse{23} In all hard
work there is profit, but the talk of the lips leads only to poverty.
\bibleverse{24} The crown of the wise is their riches, but the folly of
fools crowns them with folly. \bibleverse{25} A truthful witness saves
souls, but a false witness is deceitful. \bibleverse{26} In the fear of
Yahweh is a secure fortress, and he will be a refuge for his children.
\bibleverse{27} The fear of Yahweh is a fountain of life, turning people
from the snares of death. \bibleverse{28} In the multitude of people is
the king's glory, but in the lack of people is the destruction of the
prince. \bibleverse{29} He who is slow to anger has great understanding,
but he who has a quick temper displays folly. \bibleverse{30} The life
of the body is a heart at peace, but envy rots the bones.
\bibleverse{31} He who oppresses the poor shows contempt for his Maker,
but he who is kind to the needy honors him. \bibleverse{32} The wicked
is brought down in his calamity, but in death, the righteous has a
refuge. \bibleverse{33} Wisdom rests in the heart of one who has
understanding, and is even made known in the inward part of fools.
\bibleverse{34} Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a disgrace to
any people. \bibleverse{35} The king's favor is toward a servant who
deals wisely, but his wrath is toward one who causes shame.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{15}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} Una respuesta amable aleja la ira, pero una palabra dura
despierta la ira. \footnote{\textbf{15:1} Prov 15,18; 1Re 12,13; 1Re
  12,16} \bibleverse{2} La lengua de los sabios alaba el conocimiento,
pero las bocas de los necios destilan necedad. \footnote{\textbf{15:2}
  Prov 12,23} \bibleverse{3} Los ojos de Yahvé están en todas partes,
vigilando a los malos y a los buenos. \bibleverse{4} La lengua amable es
un árbol de vida, pero el engaño en ella aplasta el espíritu.
\bibleverse{5} Un tonto desprecia la corrección de su padre, pero el que
hace caso a la reprensión demuestra prudencia. \footnote{\textbf{15:5}
  Prov 15,32; Prov 13,1} \bibleverse{6} En la casa del justo hay muchos
tesoros, pero los ingresos de los malvados traen problemas.
\bibleverse{7} Los labios de los sabios difunden el conocimiento; no así
con el corazón de los tontos. \bibleverse{8} El sacrificio que hacen los
impíos es una abominación para Yahvé, pero la oración de los rectos es
su delicia. \footnote{\textbf{15:8} Prov 15,29; Prov 21,27; Prov 28,9;
  Gén 4,4-5; Is 1,11; Is 1,15; Luc 18,9-14} \bibleverse{9} El camino de
los impíos es una abominación para Yahvé, pero ama al que sigue la
justicia. \footnote{\textbf{15:9} Prov 11,20} \bibleverse{10} Hay una
disciplina severa para quien abandona el camino. Quien odia la
reprensión morirá. \footnote{\textbf{15:10} Prov 10,17; Prov 29,1}
\bibleverse{11} El Seol\footnote{\textbf{15:11} El Seol es el lugar de
  los muertos.} y Abadón están delante de Yahvé ---¡cuánto más el
corazón de los hijos de los hombres! \footnote{\textbf{15:11} Job 26,6;
  Sal 139,8; Jer 17,10} \bibleverse{12} Al burlón no le gusta ser
reprendido; no acudirá a los sabios. \footnote{\textbf{15:12} Prov 9,8;
  Prov 13,1} \bibleverse{13} Un corazón alegre hace una cara alegre,
pero un corazón dolorido rompe el espíritu. \footnote{\textbf{15:13}
  Prov 15,15} \bibleverse{14} El corazón de quien tiene entendimiento
busca el conocimiento, pero la boca de los necios se alimenta de la
necedad. \bibleverse{15} Todos los días de los afligidos son miserables,
pero el que tiene un corazón alegre disfruta de una fiesta continua.
\footnote{\textbf{15:15} Prov 15,13; Prov 17,22} \bibleverse{16} Mejor
es lo pequeño, con el temor de Yahvé, que un gran tesoro con problemas.
\footnote{\textbf{15:16} Prov 16,8; Prov 17,1; Sal 37,16}
\bibleverse{17} Mejor es una cena de hierbas, donde está el amor, que un
ternero engordado con odio. \bibleverse{18} El hombre iracundo suscita
la discordia, pero el que es lento para la ira apacigua los conflictos.
\footnote{\textbf{15:18} Prov 15,1; Prov 26,21; Prov 29,22}
\bibleverse{19} El camino del perezoso es como un terreno de espinas,
pero el camino de los rectos es una carretera. \footnote{\textbf{15:19}
  Prov 24,30-31} \bibleverse{20} El hijo sabio alegra al padre, pero un
necio desprecia a su madre. \footnote{\textbf{15:20} Prov 10,1}
\bibleverse{21} La insensatez es la alegría para quien está vacío de
sabiduría, pero un hombre de entendimiento mantiene su camino recto.
\bibleverse{22} Donde no hay consejo, los planes fracasan; pero en una
multitud de consejeros se establecen. \footnote{\textbf{15:22} Prov
  11,14} \bibleverse{23} La alegría llega al hombre con la respuesta de
su boca. ¡Qué buena es una palabra en el momento adecuado!
\bibleverse{24} El camino de la vida lleva a los sabios hacia arriba,
para evitar que baje al Seol. \footnote{\textbf{15:24} El Seol es el
  lugar de los muertos.} \bibleverse{25} El Señor desarraigará la casa
de los soberbios, pero mantendrá intactos los límites de la viuda.
\bibleverse{26} Yahvé detesta los pensamientos de los malvados, pero los
pensamientos de los puros son agradables. \bibleverse{27} El que está
ávido de ganancia, perturba su propia casa, pero el que odia los
sobornos vivirá. \footnote{\textbf{15:27} Sal 15,5} \bibleverse{28} El
corazón de los justos pesa las respuestas, pero la boca de los malvados
brota el mal. \bibleverse{29} Yahvé está lejos de los malvados, pero él
escucha la oración de los justos. \footnote{\textbf{15:29} Prov 15,8;
  Juan 9,31} \bibleverse{30} La luz de los ojos alegra el corazón. Las
buenas noticias dan salud a los huesos. \footnote{\textbf{15:30} Prov
  25,25} \bibleverse{31} El oído que escucha la reprensión vive, y
estará en casa entre los sabios. \bibleverse{32} El que rechaza la
corrección desprecia su propia alma, pero el que escucha la reprensión
obtiene la comprensión. \footnote{\textbf{15:32} Prov 15,5}
\bibleverse{33} El temor de Yahvé enseña la sabiduría. Antes del honor
está la humildad. \footnote{\textbf{15:33} Prov 1,7; Prov 18,12}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{15}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs
up anger. \bibleverse{2} The tongue of the wise commends knowledge, but
the mouths of fools gush out folly. \bibleverse{3} Yahweh's eyes are
everywhere, keeping watch on the evil and the good. \bibleverse{4} A
gentle tongue is a tree of life, but deceit in it crushes the spirit.
\bibleverse{5} A fool despises his father's correction, but he who heeds
reproof shows prudence. \bibleverse{6} In the house of the righteous is
much treasure, but the income of the wicked brings trouble.
\bibleverse{7} The lips of the wise spread knowledge; not so with the
heart of fools. \bibleverse{8} The sacrifice made by the wicked is an
abomination to Yahweh, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
\bibleverse{9} The way of the wicked is an abomination to Yahweh, but he
loves him who follows after righteousness. \bibleverse{10} There is
stern discipline for one who forsakes the way. Whoever hates reproof
shall die. \bibleverse{11} Sheol\footnote{\textbf{15:11} Sheol is the
  place of the dead.} and Abaddon are before Yahweh--- how much more
then the hearts of the children of men! \bibleverse{12} A scoffer
doesn't love to be reproved; he will not go to the wise. \bibleverse{13}
A glad heart makes a cheerful face, but an aching heart breaks the
spirit. \bibleverse{14} The heart of one who has understanding seeks
knowledge, but the mouths of fools feed on folly. \bibleverse{15} All
the days of the afflicted are wretched, but one who has a cheerful heart
enjoys a continual feast. \bibleverse{16} Better is little, with the
fear of Yahweh, than great treasure with trouble. \bibleverse{17} Better
is a dinner of herbs, where love is, than a fattened calf with hatred.
\bibleverse{18} A wrathful man stirs up contention, but one who is slow
to anger appeases strife. \bibleverse{19} The way of the sluggard is
like a thorn patch, but the path of the upright is a highway.
\bibleverse{20} A wise son makes a father glad, but a foolish man
despises his mother. \bibleverse{21} Folly is joy to one who is void of
wisdom, but a man of understanding keeps his way straight.
\bibleverse{22} Where there is no counsel, plans fail; but in a
multitude of counselors they are established. \bibleverse{23} Joy comes
to a man with the reply of his mouth. How good is a word at the right
time! \bibleverse{24} The path of life leads upward for the wise, to
keep him from going downward to Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{15:24} Sheol is
  the place of the dead.} \bibleverse{25} Yahweh will uproot the house
of the proud, but he will keep the widow's borders intact.
\bibleverse{26} Yahweh detests the thoughts of the wicked, but the
thoughts of the pure are pleasing. \bibleverse{27} He who is greedy for
gain troubles his own house, but he who hates bribes will live.
\bibleverse{28} The heart of the righteous weighs answers, but the mouth
of the wicked gushes out evil. \bibleverse{29} Yahweh is far from the
wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous. \bibleverse{30} The
light of the eyes rejoices the heart. Good news gives health to the
bones. \bibleverse{31} The ear that listens to reproof lives, and will
be at home among the wise. \bibleverse{32} He who refuses correction
despises his own soul, but he who listens to reproof gets understanding.
\bibleverse{33} The fear of Yahweh teaches wisdom. Before honor is
humility.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{16}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} Los planes del corazón pertenecen al hombre, pero la
respuesta de la lengua es de Yahvé. \bibleverse{2} Todos los caminos del
hombre son limpios ante sus propios ojos, pero Yahvé sopesa los motivos.
\footnote{\textbf{16:2} Prov 21,2} \bibleverse{3} Encomienda tus obras a
Yahvé, y tus planes tendrán éxito. \footnote{\textbf{16:3} Sal 37,5}
\bibleverse{4} Yahvé ha hecho todo para su propio fin. sí, incluso los
malvados para el día del mal. \bibleverse{5} Todo el que es orgulloso de
corazón es una abominación para Yahvé; ciertamente no quedarán impunes.
\footnote{\textbf{16:5} Prov 11,21} \bibleverse{6} Por la misericordia y
la verdad se expía la iniquidad. Por el temor a Yahvé los hombres se
apartan del mal. \bibleverse{7} Cuando los caminos del hombre agradan a
Yahvé, hace que hasta sus enemigos estén en paz con él. \footnote{\textbf{16:7}
  Gén 31,24; Gén 33,4} \bibleverse{8} Mejor es un poco con la justicia,
que los grandes ingresos con la injusticia. \footnote{\textbf{16:8} Prov
  15,16} \bibleverse{9} El corazón del hombre planea su curso, pero
Yahvé dirige sus pasos. \footnote{\textbf{16:9} Prov 19,21}
\bibleverse{10} Los juicios inspirados están en los labios del rey. No
traicionará su boca. \bibleverse{11} Las balanzas y los platillos
honestos son de Yahvé; todos los pesos de la bolsa son obra suya.
\footnote{\textbf{16:11} Prov 11,1} \bibleverse{12} Es una abominación
que los reyes hagan el mal, porque el trono se establece por la
justicia. \footnote{\textbf{16:12} Prov 20,28; Prov 25,5; Prov 29,14}
\bibleverse{13} Los labios justos son la delicia de los reyes. Valoran a
quien dice la verdad. \bibleverse{14} La ira del rey es un mensajero de
la muerte, pero un hombre sabio lo apaciguará. \footnote{\textbf{16:14}
  Prov 20,2} \bibleverse{15} En la luz del rostro del rey está la vida.
Su favor es como una nube de la lluvia de primavera. \footnote{\textbf{16:15}
  Prov 19,12} \bibleverse{16} ¡Cuánto mejor es conseguir sabiduría que
oro! Sí, conseguir la comprensión es ser elegido más que la plata.
\footnote{\textbf{16:16} Prov 3,14; Prov 8,10-11; Prov 8,19}
\bibleverse{17} El camino de los rectos es apartarse del mal. El que
guarda su camino preserva su alma. \bibleverse{18} La soberbia precede a
la destrucción, y un espíritu arrogante antes de una caída. \footnote{\textbf{16:18}
  Prov 18,12} \bibleverse{19} Es mejor tener un espíritu humilde con los
pobres, que repartir el botín con los orgullosos. \bibleverse{20} El que
presta atención a la Palabra encuentra la prosperidad. Quien confía en
Yahvé es bendecido. \bibleverse{21} Los sabios de corazón serán llamados
prudentes. El placer de los labios favorece la instrucción.
\bibleverse{22} La comprensión es una fuente de vida para quien la
tiene, pero el castigo de los tontos es su locura. \footnote{\textbf{16:22}
  Prov 13,14; Prov 14,27} \bibleverse{23} El corazón del sabio instruye
a su boca, y añade el aprendizaje a sus labios. \bibleverse{24} Las
palabras agradables son un panal, dulce para el alma, y salud para los
huesos. \footnote{\textbf{16:24} Prov 12,25} \bibleverse{25} Hay un
camino que le parece correcto al hombre, pero al final lleva a la
muerte. \footnote{\textbf{16:25} Prov 14,12} \bibleverse{26} El apetito
del trabajador trabaja para él, porque su boca le urge. \footnote{\textbf{16:26}
  Prov 18,7} \bibleverse{27} Un hombre sin valor trama una travesura. Su
discurso es como un fuego abrasador. \bibleverse{28} El hombre perverso
suscita conflictos. Un susurrador separa a los amigos cercanos.
\footnote{\textbf{16:28} Prov 6,14; Prov 6,19} \bibleverse{29} El hombre
violento seduce a su prójimo, y lo lleva por un camino que no es bueno.
\footnote{\textbf{16:29} Prov 1,10-14} \bibleverse{30} El que guiña los
ojos para tramar perversidades, el que comprime sus labios, está
empeñado en el mal. \footnote{\textbf{16:30} Prov 6,13} \bibleverse{31}
Las canas son una corona de gloria. Se consigue con una vida de
rectitud. \footnote{\textbf{16:31} Prov 20,29} \bibleverse{32} El que es
lento para la ira es mejor que el poderoso; el que gobierna su espíritu,
que el que toma una ciudad. \footnote{\textbf{16:32} Prov 14,29}
\bibleverse{33} La suerte está echada, pero todas sus decisiones
provienen de Yahvé.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{16}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} The plans of the heart belong to man, but the answer of
the tongue is from Yahweh. \bibleverse{2} All the ways of a man are
clean in his own eyes, but Yahweh weighs the motives. \bibleverse{3}
Commit your deeds to Yahweh, and your plans shall succeed.
\bibleverse{4} Yahweh has made everything for its own end--- yes, even
the wicked for the day of evil. \bibleverse{5} Everyone who is proud in
heart is an abomination to Yahweh; they shall certainly not be
unpunished. \bibleverse{6} By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for. By
the fear of Yahweh men depart from evil. \bibleverse{7} When a man's
ways please Yahweh, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
\bibleverse{8} Better is a little with righteousness, than great
revenues with injustice. \bibleverse{9} A man's heart plans his course,
but Yahweh directs his steps. \bibleverse{10} Inspired judgments are on
the lips of the king. He shall not betray his mouth. \bibleverse{11}
Honest balances and scales are Yahweh's; all the weights in the bag are
his work. \bibleverse{12} It is an abomination for kings to do wrong,
for the throne is established by righteousness. \bibleverse{13}
Righteous lips are the delight of kings. They value one who speaks the
truth. \bibleverse{14} The king's wrath is a messenger of death, but a
wise man will pacify it. \bibleverse{15} In the light of the king's face
is life. His favor is like a cloud of the spring rain. \bibleverse{16}
How much better it is to get wisdom than gold! Yes, to get understanding
is to be chosen rather than silver. \bibleverse{17} The highway of the
upright is to depart from evil. He who keeps his way preserves his soul.
\bibleverse{18} Pride goes before destruction, and an arrogant spirit
before a fall. \bibleverse{19} It is better to be of a lowly spirit with
the poor, than to divide the plunder with the proud. \bibleverse{20} He
who heeds the Word finds prosperity. Whoever trusts in Yahweh is
blessed. \bibleverse{21} The wise in heart shall be called prudent.
Pleasantness of the lips promotes instruction. \bibleverse{22}
Understanding is a fountain of life to one who has it, but the
punishment of fools is their folly. \bibleverse{23} The heart of the
wise instructs his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. \bibleverse{24}
Pleasant words are a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the
bones. \bibleverse{25} There is a way which seems right to a man, but in
the end it leads to death. \bibleverse{26} The appetite of the laboring
man labors for him, for his mouth urges him on. \bibleverse{27} A
worthless man devises mischief. His speech is like a scorching fire.
\bibleverse{28} A perverse man stirs up strife. A whisperer separates
close friends. \bibleverse{29} A man of violence entices his neighbor,
and leads him in a way that is not good. \bibleverse{30} One who winks
his eyes to plot perversities, one who compresses his lips, is bent on
evil. \bibleverse{31} Gray hair is a crown of glory. It is attained by a
life of righteousness. \bibleverse{32} One who is slow to anger is
better than the mighty; one who rules his spirit, than he who takes a
city. \bibleverse{33} The lot is cast into the lap, but its every
decision is from Yahweh.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-32}{%
\section{17}\label{section-32}}

\bibleverse{1} Mejor es un bocado seco con tranquilidad, que una casa
llena de fiestas con disputas. \footnote{\textbf{17:1} Prov 15,16-17;
  Prov 16,8} \bibleverse{2} El siervo que trata con sabiduría gobernará
sobre el hijo que causa vergüenza, y tendrá parte en la herencia entre
los hermanos. \bibleverse{3} El crisol es para la plata y el horno para
el oro, pero Yahvé pone a prueba los corazones. \footnote{\textbf{17:3}
  Sal 66,10} \bibleverse{4} El malhechor hace caso a los labios
perversos. Un mentiroso da oídos a una lengua traviesa. \bibleverse{5}
Quien se burla de los pobres reprocha a su Hacedor. El que se alegra de
la calamidad no quedará impune. \footnote{\textbf{17:5} Prov 14,31}
\bibleverse{6} Los hijos de los niños son la corona de los ancianos; la
gloria de los niños son sus padres. \footnote{\textbf{17:6} Sal 128,6}
\bibleverse{7} Un discurso excelente no es propio de un tonto, y mucho
menos los labios mentirosos se ajustan a un príncipe. \bibleverse{8} El
soborno es una piedra preciosa a los ojos de quien lo da; a donde quiera
que vaya, prospera. \bibleverse{9} El que cubre una ofensa promueve el
amor; pero quien repite un asunto separa a los mejores amigos.
\bibleverse{10} Una reprimenda entra más profundamente en quien tiene
entendimientoque cien latigazos a un tonto. \bibleverse{11} Un hombre
malvado sólo busca la rebelión; por lo que se enviará un cruel mensajero
contra él. \bibleverse{12} Que una osa despojada de sus cachorros se
encuentre con un hombre, más que un tonto en su locura. \bibleverse{13}
Quien recompensa el mal por el bien, el mal no saldrá de su casa.
\footnote{\textbf{17:13} Sal 109,5} \bibleverse{14} El comienzo de la
contienda es como romper una presa, Por lo tanto, hay que detener la
contienda antes de que se produzca una pelea. \bibleverse{15} El que
justifica al impío y el que condena al justo, ambos por igual son una
abominación para Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{17:15} Is 5,23}
\bibleverse{16} ¿Por qué hay dinero en la mano de un tonto para comprar
sabiduría, ya que no tiene entendimiento? \bibleverse{17} Un amigo ama
en todo momento; y un hermano ha nacido para la adversidad. \footnote{\textbf{17:17}
  Prov 18,24} \bibleverse{18} Un hombre sin entendimiento golpea las
manos, y se convierte en una garantía en presencia de su vecino.
\footnote{\textbf{17:18} Prov 6,1} \bibleverse{19} El que ama la
desobediencia ama la contienda. El que construye una puerta alta busca
la destrucción. \bibleverse{20} El que tiene un corazón perverso no
encuentra la prosperidad, y el que tiene una lengua engañosa cae en
problemas. \bibleverse{21} El que se convierte en padre de un tonto se
apena. El padre de un tonto no tiene alegría. \footnote{\textbf{17:21}
  Prov 10,1} \bibleverse{22} Un corazón alegre es una buena medicina,
pero un espíritu aplastado seca los huesos. \footnote{\textbf{17:22}
  Prov 15,13; Prov 15,15} \bibleverse{23} Un malvado recibe un soborno
en secreto, para pervertir los caminos de la justicia. \bibleverse{24}
La sabiduría está ante el rostro del que tiene entendimiento, pero los
ojos de un necio vagan hasta los confines de la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{17:24}
  Prov 4,25} \bibleverse{25} El hijo insensato causa dolor a su padre, y
la amargura a la que lo parió. \footnote{\textbf{17:25} Prov 17,21}
\bibleverse{26} También castigar al justo no es bueno, ni para azotar a
los funcionarios por su integridad. \bibleverse{27} El que ahorra sus
palabras tiene conocimiento. El que es ecuánime es un hombre
comprensivo. \footnote{\textbf{17:27} Prov 10,19; Sant 1,19}
\bibleverse{28} Incluso el necio, cuando guarda silencio, es considerado
sabio. Cuando cierra los labios, se cree que tiene criterio. \footnote{\textbf{17:28}
  Job 13,5}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-33}{%
\section{17}\label{section-33}}

\bibleverse{1} Better is a dry morsel with quietness, than a house full
of feasting with strife. \bibleverse{2} A servant who deals wisely will
rule over a son who causes shame, and shall have a part in the
inheritance among the brothers. \bibleverse{3} The refining pot is for
silver, and the furnace for gold, but Yahweh tests the hearts.
\bibleverse{4} An evildoer heeds wicked lips. A liar gives ear to a
mischievous tongue. \bibleverse{5} Whoever mocks the poor reproaches his
Maker. He who is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.
\bibleverse{6} Children's children are the crown of old men; the glory
of children is their parents. \bibleverse{7} Excellent speech isn't
fitting for a fool, much less do lying lips fit a prince. \bibleverse{8}
A bribe is a precious stone in the eyes of him who gives it; wherever he
turns, he prospers. \bibleverse{9} He who covers an offense promotes
love; but he who repeats a matter separates best friends.
\bibleverse{10} A rebuke enters deeper into one who has understanding
than a hundred lashes into a fool. \bibleverse{11} An evil man seeks
only rebellion; therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
\bibleverse{12} Let a bear robbed of her cubs meet a man, rather than a
fool in his folly. \bibleverse{13} Whoever rewards evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house. \bibleverse{14} The beginning of strife
is like breaching a dam, therefore stop contention before quarreling
breaks out. \bibleverse{15} He who justifies the wicked, and he who
condemns the righteous, both of them alike are an abomination to Yahweh.
\bibleverse{16} Why is there money in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom,
since he has no understanding? \bibleverse{17} A friend loves at all
times; and a brother is born for adversity. \bibleverse{18} A man void
of understanding strikes hands, and becomes collateral in the presence
of his neighbor. \bibleverse{19} He who loves disobedience loves strife.
One who builds a high gate seeks destruction. \bibleverse{20} One who
has a perverse heart doesn't find prosperity, and one who has a
deceitful tongue falls into trouble. \bibleverse{21} He who becomes the
father of a fool grieves. The father of a fool has no joy.
\bibleverse{22} A cheerful heart makes good medicine, but a crushed
spirit dries up the bones. \bibleverse{23} A wicked man receives a bribe
in secret, to pervert the ways of justice. \bibleverse{24} Wisdom is
before the face of one who has understanding, but the eyes of a fool
wander to the ends of the earth. \bibleverse{25} A foolish son brings
grief to his father, and bitterness to her who bore him. \bibleverse{26}
Also to punish the righteous is not good, nor to flog officials for
their integrity. \bibleverse{27} He who spares his words has knowledge.
He who is even tempered is a man of understanding. \bibleverse{28} Even
a fool, when he keeps silent, is counted wise. When he shuts his lips,
he is thought to be discerning.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-34}{%
\section{18}\label{section-34}}

\bibleverse{1} El hombre que se aísla persigue el egoísmo, y desafía
todo buen juicio. \bibleverse{2} El necio no se deleita en el
entendimiento, pero sólo para revelar su propia opinión. \bibleverse{3}
Cuando llega la maldad, llega también el desprecio, y con la vergüenza
viene la desgracia. \bibleverse{4} Las palabras de la boca del hombre
son como aguas profundas. La fuente de la sabiduría es como un arroyo
que fluye. \bibleverse{5} Ser parcial con las caras de los malvados no
es bueno, ni para privar a los inocentes de la justicia. \footnote{\textbf{18:5}
  Deut 1,17} \bibleverse{6} Los labios de un necio entran en disputa, y
su boca invita a los golpes. \bibleverse{7} La boca del necio es su
perdición, y sus labios son una trampa para su alma. \footnote{\textbf{18:7}
  Prov 13,3; Prov 16,26} \bibleverse{8} Las palabras de un chismoso son
como bocados delicados: bajan a lo más íntimo de la persona. \footnote{\textbf{18:8}
  Prov 26,22} \bibleverse{9} El que es flojo en su trabajoes hermano de
aquel que es maestro de la destrucción. \footnote{\textbf{18:9} Prov
  10,4} \bibleverse{10} El nombre de Yahvé es una torre fuerte: los
justos corren hacia él, y están a salvo. \footnote{\textbf{18:10} Prov
  14,26; Sal 20,1} \bibleverse{11} La riqueza del rico es su ciudad
fuerte, como un muro inescalable en su propia imaginación. \footnote{\textbf{18:11}
  Prov 10,15} \bibleverse{12} Antes de la destrucción, el corazón del
hombre es orgulloso, pero antes del honor está la humildad. \footnote{\textbf{18:12}
  Prov 16,18; Prov 15,33} \bibleverse{13} El que responde antes de
escuchar, que es una locura y una vergüenza para él. \bibleverse{14} El
espíritu del hombre lo sostendrá en la enfermedad, pero un espíritu
aplastado, ¿quién puede soportarlo? \footnote{\textbf{18:14} Prov 15,13;
  Prov 15,15} \bibleverse{15} El corazón del que discierne obtiene
conocimiento. El oído del sabio busca el conocimiento. \bibleverse{16}
El regalo de un hombre le da cabida, y lo lleva ante los grandes
hombres. \footnote{\textbf{18:16} Gén 43,11} \bibleverse{17} El que
defiende su causa primero parece tener razón. hasta que llega otro y lo
interroga. \bibleverse{18} El lote resuelve las disputas, y mantiene
separados a los fuertes. \footnote{\textbf{18:18} Prov 16,33}
\bibleverse{19} Un hermano ofendido es más difícil que una ciudad
fortificada. Las disputas son como los barrotes de una fortaleza.
\bibleverse{20} El estómago del hombre se llena con el fruto de su boca.
Con la cosecha de sus labios está satisfecho. \footnote{\textbf{18:20}
  Prov 12,14; Prov 13,2} \bibleverse{21} La muerte y la vida están en
poder de la lengua; los que la aman comerán su fruto. \footnote{\textbf{18:21}
  Prov 13,3} \bibleverse{22} Quien encuentra una esposa, encuentra algo
bueno, y obtiene el favor de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{18:22} Prov 19,14;
  Prov 31,10} \bibleverse{23} Los pobres piden clemencia, pero los ricos
responden con dureza. \bibleverse{24} Un hombre con muchos compañeros
puede arruinarse, pero hay un amigo que está más cerca que un hermano.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-35}{%
\section{18}\label{section-35}}

\bibleverse{1} A man who isolates himself pursues selfishness, and
defies all sound judgment. \bibleverse{2} A fool has no delight in
understanding, but only in revealing his own opinion. \bibleverse{3}
When wickedness comes, contempt also comes, and with shame comes
disgrace. \bibleverse{4} The words of a man's mouth are like deep
waters. The fountain of wisdom is like a flowing brook. \bibleverse{5}
To be partial to the faces of the wicked is not good, nor to deprive the
innocent of justice. \bibleverse{6} A fool's lips come into strife, and
his mouth invites beatings. \bibleverse{7} A fool's mouth is his
destruction, and his lips are a snare to his soul. \bibleverse{8} The
words of a gossip are like dainty morsels: they go down into a person's
innermost parts. \bibleverse{9} One who is slack in his work is brother
to him who is a master of destruction. \bibleverse{10} Yahweh's name is
a strong tower: the righteous run to him, and are safe. \bibleverse{11}
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, like an unscalable wall in his
own imagination. \bibleverse{12} Before destruction the heart of man is
proud, but before honor is humility. \bibleverse{13} He who answers
before he hears, that is folly and shame to him. \bibleverse{14} A man's
spirit will sustain him in sickness, but a crushed spirit, who can bear?
\bibleverse{15} The heart of the discerning gets knowledge. The ear of
the wise seeks knowledge. \bibleverse{16} A man's gift makes room for
him, and brings him before great men. \bibleverse{17} He who pleads his
cause first seems right--- until another comes and questions him.
\bibleverse{18} The lot settles disputes, and keeps strong ones apart.
\bibleverse{19} A brother offended is more difficult than a fortified
city. Disputes are like the bars of a fortress. \bibleverse{20} A man's
stomach is filled with the fruit of his mouth. With the harvest of his
lips he is satisfied. \bibleverse{21} Death and life are in the power of
the tongue; those who love it will eat its fruit. \bibleverse{22}
Whoever finds a wife finds a good thing, and obtains favor of Yahweh.
\bibleverse{23} The poor plead for mercy, but the rich answer harshly.
\bibleverse{24} A man of many companions may be ruined, but there is a
friend who sticks closer than a brother.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-36}{%
\section{19}\label{section-36}}

\bibleverse{1} Mejor es el pobre que camina en su integridadque el que
es perverso de labios y es necio. \footnote{\textbf{19:1} Prov 28,6}
\bibleverse{2} No es bueno tener celo sin conocimiento, ni precipitarse
con los pies y perder el camino. \bibleverse{3} La necedad del hombre
subvierte su camino; su corazón se enfurece contra Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{19:3}
  Lam 3,39} \bibleverse{4} La riqueza añade muchos amigos, pero el pobre
está separado de su amigo. \footnote{\textbf{19:4} Prov 14,20}
\bibleverse{5} El testigo falso no quedará impune. El que vierte
mentiras no quedará libre. \footnote{\textbf{19:5} Prov 19,9; Prov
  21,28; Deut 19,18-21} \bibleverse{6} Muchos pedirán el favor de un
gobernante, y todo el mundo es amigo de un hombre que da regalos.
\bibleverse{7} Todos los parientes de los pobres le rehúyen; ¡cuánto más
le evitan sus amigos! Los persigue con súplicas, pero se han ido.
\footnote{\textbf{19:7} Prov 19,4} \bibleverse{8} El que obtiene la
sabiduría ama su propia alma. El que guarda el entendimiento encontrará
el bien. \bibleverse{9} El testigo falso no quedará impune. El que dice
mentiras perecerá. \footnote{\textbf{19:9} Prov 19,5} \bibleverse{10} La
vida delicada no es apropiada para un tonto, y mucho menos que un siervo
se enseñoree de los príncipes. \bibleverse{11} La discreción del hombre
lo hace lento para la ira. Es su gloria pasar por alto una ofensa.
\bibleverse{12} La ira del rey es como el rugido de un león, pero su
favor es como el rocío en la hierba. \footnote{\textbf{19:12} Prov 20,2;
  Prov 16,14-15} \bibleverse{13} El hijo necio es la calamidad de su
padre. Las peleas de una esposa son un goteo continuo. \footnote{\textbf{19:13}
  Prov 10,1} \bibleverse{14} La casa y las riquezas son una herencia de
los padres, pero una esposa prudente es de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{19:14}
  Prov 18,22} \bibleverse{15} La pereza hace caer en un profundo sueño.
El alma ociosa sufrirá hambre. \footnote{\textbf{19:15} Prov 10,4; Prov
  23,21} \bibleverse{16} El que guarda el mandamiento guarda su alma,
pero el que es despectivo en sus caminos, morirá. \footnote{\textbf{19:16}
  Prov 16,17} \bibleverse{17} El que se apiada de los pobres presta a
Yahvé; lo recompensará. \footnote{\textbf{19:17} Prov 14,31; Sal 41,1-3;
  Mat 25,40} \bibleverse{18} Disciplina a tu hijo, porque hay esperanza;
no seas partícipe de su muerte. \footnote{\textbf{19:18} Efes 6,4}
\bibleverse{19} El hombre de mal genio debe pagar la pena, porque si lo
rescatas, debes hacerlo de nuevo. \bibleverse{20} Escucha el consejo y
recibe la instrucción, para que seas sabio en tu fin último.
\bibleverse{21} Hay muchos planes en el corazón del hombre, pero el
consejo de Yahvé prevalecerá. \footnote{\textbf{19:21} Prov 16,9; Jer
  10,23} \bibleverse{22} Lo que hace que un hombre sea deseado es su
bondad. Un pobre es mejor que un mentiroso. \bibleverse{23} El temor a
Yahvé conduce a la vida, y luego a la satisfacción; descansa y no será
tocado por los problemas. \footnote{\textbf{19:23} Prov 14,27}
\bibleverse{24} El perezoso entierra su mano en el plato; no volverá a
llevárselo a la boca. \footnote{\textbf{19:24} Prov 26,15}
\bibleverse{25} Azotad a un burlón, y el simple aprenderá la prudencia;
Reprende al que tiene entendimiento, y obtendrá conocimiento.
\footnote{\textbf{19:25} Prov 21,11} \bibleverse{26} El que roba a su
padre y aleja a su madrees un hijo que causa vergüenza y trae reproche.
\bibleverse{27} Si dejas de escuchar la instrucción, hijo mío, te
alejarás de las palabras del conocimiento. \footnote{\textbf{19:27} Sant
  1,22} \bibleverse{28} Un testigo corrupto se burla de la justicia, y
la boca de los malvados engulle iniquidad. \bibleverse{29} Las
penasestán preparadas para los burlones, y golpes para las espaldas de
los tontos. \footnote{\textbf{19:29} Prov 26,3}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-37}{%
\section{19}\label{section-37}}

\bibleverse{1} Better is the poor who walks in his integrity than he who
is perverse in his lips and is a fool. \bibleverse{2} It isn't good to
have zeal without knowledge, nor being hasty with one's feet and missing
the way. \bibleverse{3} The foolishness of man subverts his way; his
heart rages against Yahweh. \bibleverse{4} Wealth adds many friends, but
the poor is separated from his friend. \bibleverse{5} A false witness
shall not be unpunished. He who pours out lies shall not go free.
\bibleverse{6} Many will entreat the favor of a ruler, and everyone is a
friend to a man who gives gifts. \bibleverse{7} All the relatives of the
poor shun him; how much more do his friends avoid him! He pursues them
with pleas, but they are gone. \bibleverse{8} He who gets wisdom loves
his own soul. He who keeps understanding shall find good. \bibleverse{9}
A false witness shall not be unpunished. He who utters lies shall
perish. \bibleverse{10} Delicate living is not appropriate for a fool,
much less for a servant to have rule over princes. \bibleverse{11} The
discretion of a man makes him slow to anger. It is his glory to overlook
an offense. \bibleverse{12} The king's wrath is like the roaring of a
lion, but his favor is like dew on the grass. \bibleverse{13} A foolish
son is the calamity of his father. A wife's quarrels are a continual
dripping. \bibleverse{14} House and riches are an inheritance from
fathers, but a prudent wife is from Yahweh. \bibleverse{15} Slothfulness
casts into a deep sleep. The idle soul shall suffer hunger.
\bibleverse{16} He who keeps the commandment keeps his soul, but he who
is contemptuous in his ways shall die. \bibleverse{17} He who has pity
on the poor lends to Yahweh; he will reward him. \bibleverse{18}
Discipline your son, for there is hope; don't be a willing party to his
death. \bibleverse{19} A hot-tempered man must pay the penalty, for if
you rescue him, you must do it again. \bibleverse{20} Listen to counsel
and receive instruction, that you may be wise in your latter end.
\bibleverse{21} There are many plans in a man's heart, but Yahweh's
counsel will prevail. \bibleverse{22} That which makes a man to be
desired is his kindness. A poor man is better than a liar.
\bibleverse{23} The fear of Yahweh leads to life, then contentment; he
rests and will not be touched by trouble. \bibleverse{24} The sluggard
buries his hand in the dish; he will not so much as bring it to his
mouth again. \bibleverse{25} Flog a scoffer, and the simple will learn
prudence; rebuke one who has understanding, and he will gain knowledge.
\bibleverse{26} He who robs his father and drives away his mother is a
son who causes shame and brings reproach. \bibleverse{27} If you stop
listening to instruction, my son, you will stray from the words of
knowledge. \bibleverse{28} A corrupt witness mocks justice, and the
mouth of the wicked gulps down iniquity. \bibleverse{29} Penalties are
prepared for scoffers, and beatings for the backs of fools.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-38}{%
\section{20}\label{section-38}}

\bibleverse{1} El vino es un burlador y la cerveza es un pendenciero.
Quien se deja llevar por ellos no es sabio. \footnote{\textbf{20:1} Prov
  23,29-35; Prov 31,5} \bibleverse{2} El terror de un rey es como el
rugido de un león. Quien lo provoque a la ira perderá su propia vida.
\footnote{\textbf{20:2} Prov 16,14; Prov 19,12} \bibleverse{3} Es un
honor para un hombre mantenerse alejado de las disputas, pero todos los
tontos se pelearán. \bibleverse{4} El perezoso no arará a causa del
invierno; por lo que mendigará en la cosecha, y no tendrá nada.
\footnote{\textbf{20:4} Prov 6,6-8} \bibleverse{5} El consejo en el
corazón del hombre es como las aguas profundas, pero un hombre
comprensivo lo sacará. \footnote{\textbf{20:5} Prov 18,4} \bibleverse{6}
Muchos hombres pretenden ser hombres de amor indefectible, pero ¿quién
puede encontrar un hombre fiel? \bibleverse{7} El hombre justo camina
con integridad. Benditos sean sus hijos después de él. \footnote{\textbf{20:7}
  Prov 14,26; Sal 112,2} \bibleverse{8} Un rey que se sienta en el trono
del juiciodispersa todo el mal con sus ojos. \footnote{\textbf{20:8} Sal
  101,3-8} \bibleverse{9} ¿Quién puede decir: ``He purificado mi
corazón''? Estoy limpio y sin pecado''. \footnote{\textbf{20:9} Prov
  28,13; Prov 30,12} \bibleverse{10} Pesos y medidas diferentes, ambos
por igual son una abominación para Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{20:10} Prov
  20,23; Prov 11,1} \bibleverse{11} Hasta un niño se da a conocer por
sus actos, si su trabajo es puro, y si es correcto. \footnote{\textbf{20:11}
  Prov 22,6} \bibleverse{12} El oído que oye y el ojo que ve, Yahvé ha
hecho incluso a los dos. \bibleverse{13} No ames el sueño, no sea que
llegues a la pobreza. Abre los ojos y te saciarás de pan. \footnote{\textbf{20:13}
  Prov 6,10} \bibleverse{14} ``No es bueno, no es bueno'', dice el
comprador; pero cuando se va por su camino, entonces se jacta.
\bibleverse{15} Hay oro y abundancia de rubíes, pero los labios del
conocimiento son una joya rara. \bibleverse{16} Toma la prenda de quien
pone una garantía para un extranjero; y lo tienen en prenda por una
mujer descarriada. \footnote{\textbf{20:16} Prov 6,1-5; Prov 27,13}
\bibleverse{17} La comida fraudulenta es dulce para el hombre, pero
después se le llena la boca de grava. \footnote{\textbf{20:17} Prov 9,17}
\bibleverse{18} Los planes se establecen mediante asesoramiento; ¡con
una guía sabia haces la guerra! \footnote{\textbf{20:18} Prov 24,6}
\bibleverse{19} El que va de un lado a otro como portador de cuentos
revela secretos; por tanto, no te hagas compañía de quien abre mucho los
labios. \bibleverse{20} El que maldiga a su padre o a su madre, su
lámpara se apagará en la oscuridad de las tinieblas. \footnote{\textbf{20:20}
  Éxod 21,17} \bibleverse{21} Una herencia ganada rápidamente al
principiono será bendecido al final. \bibleverse{22} No digas: ``Pagaré
el mal''. Espera a Yahvé, y él te salvará. \footnote{\textbf{20:22} Prov
  24,29; Rom 12,17-19} \bibleverse{23} Yahvé detesta las diferencias de
peso, y las balanzas deshonestas no son agradables. \footnote{\textbf{20:23}
  Prov 20,10} \bibleverse{24} Los pasos del hombre son de Yahvé; ¿cómo
puede entonces el hombre entender su camino? \bibleverse{25} Es una
trampa para el hombre hacer una entrega precipitada, para luego
considerar sus votos. \footnote{\textbf{20:25} Sal 101,8}
\bibleverse{26} Un rey sabio selecciona a los malvados, y conduce el
trillo sobre ellos. \bibleverse{27} El espíritu del hombre es la lámpara
de Yahvé, buscando en todas sus partes más íntimas. \footnote{\textbf{20:27}
  1Cor 2,11} \bibleverse{28} El amor y la fidelidad mantienen al rey a
salvo. Su trono se sustenta en el amor. \footnote{\textbf{20:28} Prov
  16,12} \bibleverse{29} La gloria de los jóvenes es su fuerza. El
esplendor de los ancianos son sus canas. \footnote{\textbf{20:29} Prov
  16,31} \bibleverse{30} Los golpes que hieren limpian el mal, y los
golpes purgan las partes más íntimas.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-39}{%
\section{20}\label{section-39}}

\bibleverse{1} Wine is a mocker and beer is a brawler. Whoever is led
astray by them is not wise. \bibleverse{2} The terror of a king is like
the roaring of a lion. He who provokes him to anger forfeits his own
life. \bibleverse{3} It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife,
but every fool will be quarreling. \bibleverse{4} The sluggard will not
plow by reason of the winter; therefore he shall beg in harvest, and
have nothing. \bibleverse{5} Counsel in the heart of man is like deep
water, but a man of understanding will draw it out. \bibleverse{6} Many
men claim to be men of unfailing love, but who can find a faithful man?
\bibleverse{7} A righteous man walks in integrity. Blessed are his
children after him. \bibleverse{8} A king who sits on the throne of
judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes. \bibleverse{9} Who can
say, ``I have made my heart pure. I am clean and without sin?''
\bibleverse{10} Differing weights and differing measures, both of them
alike are an abomination to Yahweh. \bibleverse{11} Even a child makes
himself known by his doings, whether his work is pure, and whether it is
right. \bibleverse{12} The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, Yahweh has
made even both of them. \bibleverse{13} Don't love sleep, lest you come
to poverty. Open your eyes, and you shall be satisfied with bread.
\bibleverse{14} ``It's no good, it's no good,'' says the buyer; but when
he is gone his way, then he boasts. \bibleverse{15} There is gold and
abundance of rubies, but the lips of knowledge are a rare jewel.
\bibleverse{16} Take the garment of one who puts up collateral for a
stranger; and hold him in pledge for a wayward woman. \bibleverse{17}
Fraudulent food is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth is filled
with gravel. \bibleverse{18} Plans are established by advice; by wise
guidance you wage war! \bibleverse{19} He who goes about as a
tale-bearer reveals secrets; therefore don't keep company with him who
opens wide his lips. \bibleverse{20} Whoever curses his father or his
mother, his lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness.
\bibleverse{21} An inheritance quickly gained at the beginning won't be
blessed in the end. \bibleverse{22} Don't say, ``I will pay back evil.''
Wait for Yahweh, and he will save you. \bibleverse{23} Yahweh detests
differing weights, and dishonest scales are not pleasing.
\bibleverse{24} A man's steps are from Yahweh; how then can man
understand his way? \bibleverse{25} It is a snare to a man to make a
rash dedication, then later to consider his vows. \bibleverse{26} A wise
king winnows out the wicked, and drives the threshing wheel over them.
\bibleverse{27} The spirit of man is Yahweh's lamp, searching all his
innermost parts. \bibleverse{28} Love and faithfulness keep the king
safe. His throne is sustained by love. \bibleverse{29} The glory of
young men is their strength. The splendor of old men is their gray hair.
\bibleverse{30} Wounding blows cleanse away evil, and beatings purge the
innermost parts.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-40}{%
\section{21}\label{section-40}}

\bibleverse{1} El corazón del rey está en la mano de Yahvé como las
corrientes de agua. Lo convierte en lo que desea. \footnote{\textbf{21:1}
  Sal 33,15} \bibleverse{2} Todo camino del hombre es correcto a sus
propios ojos, pero Yahvé pesa los corazones. \footnote{\textbf{21:2}
  Prov 16,2; Prov 24,12} \bibleverse{3} Hacer rectitud y justiciaes más
aceptable para Yahvé que el sacrificio. \footnote{\textbf{21:3} 1Sam
  15,22; Is 1,11-18; Os 6,6} \bibleverse{4} Una mirada elevada y un
corazón orgulloso, la lámpara de los malvados, es el pecado. \footnote{\textbf{21:4}
  Is 2,11} \bibleverse{5} Los planes de los diligentes seguramente
conducen a la ganancia; y todo el que se precipita seguramente se
precipita a la pobreza. \bibleverse{6} Conseguir tesoros por una lengua
mentirosaes un vapor fugaz para los que buscan la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{21:6}
  Prov 10,2} \bibleverse{7} La violencia de los malvados los ahuyentará,
porque se niegan a hacer lo que es correcto. \bibleverse{8} El camino
del culpable es tortuoso, pero la conducta del inocente es recta.
\bibleverse{9} Es mejor habitar en el rincón de la azoteaque compartir
una casa con una mujer contenciosa. \footnote{\textbf{21:9} Prov 21,19;
  Prov 25,24} \bibleverse{10} El alma del malvado desea el mal; su
prójimo no encuentra misericordia en sus ojos. \bibleverse{11} Cuando el
burlador es castigado, el simple adquiere sabiduría. Cuando el sabio se
instruye, recibe conocimiento. \footnote{\textbf{21:11} Prov 19,25}
\bibleverse{12} El Justo considera la casa de los malvados, y lleva a
los malvados a la ruina. \bibleverse{13} El que detenga sus oídos ante
el clamor de los pobres, también gritará, pero no será escuchado.
\bibleverse{14} Un regalo en secreto apacigua la ira, y un soborno en el
manto, una fuerte ira. \footnote{\textbf{21:14} 1Sam 25,18}
\bibleverse{15} El justo se alegra de hacer justicia; sino que es una
destrucción para los obreros de la iniquidad. \bibleverse{16} El hombre
que se aleja del camino del entendimientodescansará en la asamblea de
los espíritus difuntos. \bibleverse{17} El que ama el placer será un
hombre pobre. El que ama el vino y el aceite no será rico. \footnote{\textbf{21:17}
  Prov 23,21} \bibleverse{18} El impío es un rescate para el justo, los
traidores por los rectos. \footnote{\textbf{21:18} Prov 11,8}
\bibleverse{19} Es mejor habitar en una tierra desierta, que con una
mujer contenciosa e inquieta. \footnote{\textbf{21:19} Prov 21,9}
\bibleverse{20} Hay un tesoro precioso y aceite en la morada de los
sabios, pero el necio se lo traga. \bibleverse{21} El que sigue la
justicia y la bondadencuentra la vida, la justicia y el honor.
\bibleverse{22} Un hombre sabio escala la ciudad de los poderosos, y
hace bajar la fuerza de su confianza. \footnote{\textbf{21:22} Prov 24,5}
\bibleverse{23} El que cuida su boca y su lenguaguarda su alma de los
problemas. \footnote{\textbf{21:23} Prov 13,3} \bibleverse{24} El hombre
orgulloso y arrogante --- ``burlador'' es su nombre ---trabaja en la
arrogancia del orgullo. \bibleverse{25} El deseo del perezoso lo mata,
porque sus manos se niegan a trabajar. \footnote{\textbf{21:25} Prov
  13,3} \bibleverse{26} Hay quienes codician con avidez todo el día;
pero los justos dan y no retienen. \bibleverse{27} El sacrificio de los
malvados es una abominación ---¡cuánto más, cuando lo trae con una mente
perversa! \footnote{\textbf{21:27} Prov 15,8} \bibleverse{28} El testigo
falso perecerá. Un hombre que escucha habla con la eternidad.
\footnote{\textbf{21:28} Prov 19,5; Prov 19,9} \bibleverse{29} El
malvado endurece su rostro; pero en cuanto a los rectos, él establece
sus caminos. \bibleverse{30} No hay sabiduría ni entendimientoni consejo
contra Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{21:30} Sal 33,10-11} \bibleverse{31} El
caballo está preparado para el día de la batalla; pero la victoria es de
Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{21:31} Sal 33,17; Is 31,1; Is 31,3}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-41}{%
\section{21}\label{section-41}}

\bibleverse{1} The king's heart is in Yahweh's hand like the
watercourses. He turns it wherever he desires. \bibleverse{2} Every way
of a man is right in his own eyes, but Yahweh weighs the hearts.
\bibleverse{3} To do righteousness and justice is more acceptable to
Yahweh than sacrifice. \bibleverse{4} A high look and a proud heart, the
lamp of the wicked, is sin. \bibleverse{5} The plans of the diligent
surely lead to profit; and everyone who is hasty surely rushes to
poverty. \bibleverse{6} Getting treasures by a lying tongue is a
fleeting vapor for those who seek death. \bibleverse{7} The violence of
the wicked will drive them away, because they refuse to do what is
right. \bibleverse{8} The way of the guilty is devious, but the conduct
of the innocent is upright. \bibleverse{9} It is better to dwell in the
corner of the housetop than to share a house with a contentious woman.
\bibleverse{10} The soul of the wicked desires evil; his neighbor finds
no mercy in his eyes. \bibleverse{11} When the mocker is punished, the
simple gains wisdom. When the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge.
\bibleverse{12} The Righteous One considers the house of the wicked, and
brings the wicked to ruin. \bibleverse{13} Whoever stops his ears at the
cry of the poor, he will also cry out, but shall not be heard.
\bibleverse{14} A gift in secret pacifies anger, and a bribe in the
cloak, strong wrath. \bibleverse{15} It is joy to the righteous to do
justice; but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.
\bibleverse{16} The man who wanders out of the way of understanding
shall rest in the assembly of the departed spirits. \bibleverse{17} He
who loves pleasure will be a poor man. He who loves wine and oil won't
be rich. \bibleverse{18} The wicked is a ransom for the righteous, the
treacherous for the upright. \bibleverse{19} It is better to dwell in a
desert land, than with a contentious and fretful woman. \bibleverse{20}
There is precious treasure and oil in the dwelling of the wise, but a
foolish man swallows it up. \bibleverse{21} He who follows after
righteousness and kindness finds life, righteousness, and honor.
\bibleverse{22} A wise man scales the city of the mighty, and brings
down the strength of its confidence. \bibleverse{23} Whoever guards his
mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from troubles. \bibleverse{24} The
proud and arrogant man---``Scoffer'' is his name--- he works in the
arrogance of pride. \bibleverse{25} The desire of the sluggard kills
him, for his hands refuse to labor. \bibleverse{26} There are those who
covet greedily all day long; but the righteous give and don't withhold.
\bibleverse{27} The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination--- how
much more, when he brings it with a wicked mind! \bibleverse{28} A false
witness will perish. A man who listens speaks to eternity.
\bibleverse{29} A wicked man hardens his face; but as for the upright,
he establishes his ways. \bibleverse{30} There is no wisdom nor
understanding nor counsel against Yahweh. \bibleverse{31} The horse is
prepared for the day of battle; but victory is with Yahweh.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-42}{%
\section{22}\label{section-42}}

\bibleverse{1} El buen nombre es más deseable que las grandes riquezas,
y el favor amoroso es mejor que la plata y el oro. \footnote{\textbf{22:1}
  Ecl 7,1} \bibleverse{2} Los ricos y los pobres tienen esto en común:
Yahvé es el creador de todos ellos. \bibleverse{3} Un hombre prudente ve
el peligro y se esconde; pero los simples pasan, y sufren por ello.
\footnote{\textbf{22:3} Prov 27,12} \bibleverse{4} El resultado de la
humildad y el temor a Yahvées la riqueza, el honor y la vida.
\bibleverse{5} Espinas y trampas hay en el camino de los malvados; quien
guarda su alma se aleja de ellos. \bibleverse{6} Educa al niño en el
camino que debe seguir, y cuando sea viejo no se apartará de él.
\footnote{\textbf{22:6} Prov 20,11} \bibleverse{7} Los ricos dominan a
los pobres. El prestatario está al servicio del prestamista.
\bibleverse{8} El que siembra maldad cosecha problemas, y la vara de su
furia será destruida. \footnote{\textbf{22:8} Job 4,8} \bibleverse{9} El
que tiene un ojo generoso será bendecido, porque comparte su comida con
los pobres. \footnote{\textbf{22:9} Prov 19,17} \bibleverse{10} Expulsa
al burlón, y se acabará la contienda; sí, se acabarán las peleas y los
insultos. \footnote{\textbf{22:10} Prov 26,20; Gén 21,9-10}
\bibleverse{11} El que ama la pureza de corazón y habla con graciaes el
amigo del rey. \footnote{\textbf{22:11} Sal 101,6} \bibleverse{12} Los
ojos de Yahvé vigilan el conocimiento, pero frustra las palabras de los
infieles. \bibleverse{13} El perezoso dice: ``¡Hay un león afuera! Me
matarán en las calles''. \footnote{\textbf{22:13} Prov 26,13}
\bibleverse{14} La boca de una adúltera es un pozo profundo. El que está
bajo la ira de Yahvé caerá en ella. \footnote{\textbf{22:14} Prov 5,3-4;
  Prov 23,27} \bibleverse{15} La locura está ligada al corazón de un
niño; la vara de la disciplina lo aleja de él. \footnote{\textbf{22:15}
  Prov 23,14; Prov 29,17} \bibleverse{16} El que oprime al pobre para su
propio aumento y el que da al rico, ambos llegan a la pobreza.

\hypertarget{primera-colecciuxf3n-de-dichos-de-los-sabios-introducciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Primera colección de dichos de los sabios;
Introducción}\label{primera-colecciuxf3n-de-dichos-de-los-sabios-introducciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{17} Vuelve tu oído y escucha las palabras de los sabios.
Aplica tu corazón a mis enseñanzas. \bibleverse{18} Porque es una cosa
agradable si las guardas dentro de ti, si todos ellos están listos en
sus labios. \bibleverse{19} Hoy te enseño, incluso a ti, para que tu
confianza esté en Yahvé. \bibleverse{20} ¿No te he escrito treinta cosas
excelentesde consejo y conocimiento, \bibleverse{21} Para enseñarte la
verdad, palabras fiables, para dar respuestas sólidas a los que te
enviaron?

\hypertarget{recordatorios-individuales}{%
\subsection{Recordatorios
individuales}\label{recordatorios-individuales}}

\bibleverse{22} No exploten al pobre porque es pobre; y no aplastar a
los necesitados en los tribunales; \bibleverse{23} porque Yahvé
defenderá su caso, y saquean la vida de los que los saquean. \footnote{\textbf{22:23}
  Prov 23,11} \bibleverse{24} No te hagas amigo de un hombre de mal
genio. No te asocies con quien alberga ira, \footnote{\textbf{22:24}
  Prov 29,22} \bibleverse{25} para que no aprendas sus caminosy atrapar
tu alma. \bibleverse{26} No seas de los que golpean las manos, de los
que son garantía de las deudas. \footnote{\textbf{22:26} Prov 6,1}
\bibleverse{27} Si no tienes medios para pagar, ¿por qué debería
quitarte la cama de debajo de ti? \bibleverse{28} No muevas el antiguo
mojónque sus padres han establecido. \footnote{\textbf{22:28} Prov
  23,10; Deut 27,17} \bibleverse{29} ¿Ves ena un hombre hábil en su
trabajo? Servirá a los reyes. No servirá a los hombres oscuros.
\footnote{\textbf{22:29} Prov 21,5}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-43}{%
\section{22}\label{section-43}}

\bibleverse{1} A good name is more desirable than great riches, and
loving favor is better than silver and gold. \bibleverse{2} The rich and
the poor have this in common: Yahweh is the maker of them all.
\bibleverse{3} A prudent man sees danger and hides himself; but the
simple pass on, and suffer for it. \bibleverse{4} The result of humility
and the fear of Yahweh is wealth, honor, and life. \bibleverse{5} Thorns
and snares are in the path of the wicked; whoever guards his soul stays
from them. \bibleverse{6} Train up a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not depart from it. \bibleverse{7} The rich rule
over the poor. The borrower is servant to the lender. \bibleverse{8} He
who sows wickedness reaps trouble, and the rod of his fury will be
destroyed. \bibleverse{9} He who has a generous eye will be blessed, for
he shares his food with the poor. \bibleverse{10} Drive out the mocker,
and strife will go out; yes, quarrels and insults will stop.
\bibleverse{11} He who loves purity of heart and speaks gracefully is
the king's friend. \bibleverse{12} Yahweh's eyes watch over knowledge,
but he frustrates the words of the unfaithful. \bibleverse{13} The
sluggard says, ``There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the
streets!'' \bibleverse{14} The mouth of an adulteress is a deep pit. He
who is under Yahweh's wrath will fall into it. \bibleverse{15} Folly is
bound up in the heart of a child; the rod of discipline drives it far
from him. \bibleverse{16} Whoever oppresses the poor for his own
increase and whoever gives to the rich, both come to poverty.

\hypertarget{first-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise-men-introduction}{%
\subsection{First collection of sayings of the wise men;
Introduction}\label{first-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise-men-introduction}}

\bibleverse{17} Turn your ear, and listen to the words of the wise.
Apply your heart to my teaching. \bibleverse{18} For it is a pleasant
thing if you keep them within you, if all of them are ready on your
lips. \bibleverse{19} I teach you today, even you, so that your trust
may be in Yahweh. \bibleverse{20} Haven't I written to you thirty
excellent things of counsel and knowledge, \bibleverse{21} To teach you
truth, reliable words, to give sound answers to the ones who sent you?

\hypertarget{individual-reminders}{%
\subsection{Individual Reminders}\label{individual-reminders}}

\bibleverse{22} Don't exploit the poor because he is poor; and don't
crush the needy in court; \bibleverse{23} for Yahweh will plead their
case, and plunder the life of those who plunder them. \bibleverse{24}
Don't befriend a hot-tempered man. Don't associate with one who harbors
anger, \bibleverse{25} lest you learn his ways and ensnare your soul.
\bibleverse{26} Don't you be one of those who strike hands, of those who
are collateral for debts. \bibleverse{27} If you don't have means to
pay, why should he take away your bed from under you? \bibleverse{28}
Don't move the ancient boundary stone which your fathers have set up.
\bibleverse{29} Do you see a man skilled in his work? He will serve
kings. He won't serve obscure men.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-44}{%
\section{23}\label{section-44}}

\bibleverse{1} Cuando te sientas a comer con una regla, considera con
diligencia lo que tienes delante; \bibleverse{2} poner un cuchillo en la
gargantasi eres un hombre dado al apetito. \bibleverse{3} No estés
deseoso de sus delicias, ya que son alimentos engañosos. \bibleverse{4}
No te canses de ser rico. En tu sabiduría, muestra moderación.
\footnote{\textbf{23:4} Prov 28,22; Ecl 9,11} \bibleverse{5} ¿Por qué
pones tus ojos en lo que no es? Porque ciertamente le salen alas como a
un águila y vuela en el cielo. \bibleverse{6} No comas la comida de
quien tiene un ojo tacaño, y no anhelan sus delicias, \bibleverse{7}
pues mientras piensa en el costo, así es. ``¡Come y bebe!'', te dice,
pero su corazón no está contigo. \bibleverse{8} Vomitarás el bocado que
has comidoy desperdiciar tus agradables palabras. \bibleverse{9} No
hables al oído de un tonto, porque despreciará la sabiduría de tus
palabras. \footnote{\textbf{23:9} Prov 9,8} \bibleverse{10} No muevas el
antiguo mojón. No invadan los campos de los huérfanos, \footnote{\textbf{23:10}
  Prov 22,28} \bibleverse{11} para su Defensor es fuerte. Él defenderá
su caso contra ti. \bibleverse{12} Aplica tu corazón a la instrucción, y
tus oídos a las palabras del conocimiento. \bibleverse{13} No retengas
la corrección de un niño. Si lo castigas con la vara, no morirá.
\bibleverse{14} Castígalo con la vara, y salvar su alma del Seol.
\footnote{\textbf{23:14} El Seol es el lugar de los muertos.}
\footnote{\textbf{23:14} Prov 13,24; Prov 22,15} \bibleverse{15} Hijo
mío, si tu corazón es sabio, entonces mi corazón se alegrará, incluso el
mío. \bibleverse{16} Sí, mi corazón se alegrarácuando tus labios dicen
lo que es correcto. \bibleverse{17} Que tu corazón no envidie a los
pecadores, sino que teman a Yahvé todo el día. \bibleverse{18}
Ciertamente, hay una esperanza futura, y tu esperanza no será cortada.
\bibleverse{19} Escucha, hijo mío, y sé sabio, ¡y mantener tu corazón en
el camino correcto! \bibleverse{20} No te encuentres entre los que beben
demasiado vino, o los que se atiborran de carne; \footnote{\textbf{23:20}
  Luc 21,34} \bibleverse{21} porque el borracho y el glotón se volverán
pobres; y la somnolencia los viste de harapos. \bibleverse{22} Escucha a
tu padre que te dio la vida, y no desprecies a tu madre cuando sea
vieja. \footnote{\textbf{23:22} Prov 1,8} \bibleverse{23} Compra la
verdad y no la vendas. Consigue sabiduría, disciplina y comprensión.
\bibleverse{24} El padre de los justos tiene una gran alegría. Quien
engendra un hijo sabio se deleita en él. \bibleverse{25} ¡Que se alegren
tu padre y tu madre! ¡Que se alegre la que te parió! \bibleverse{26}
Hijo mío, dame tu corazón; y que tus ojos se mantengan en mis caminos.
\bibleverse{27} Para una prostituta es un pozo profundo; y una esposa
caprichosa es un pozo estrecho. \footnote{\textbf{23:27} Prov 22,14}
\bibleverse{28} Sí, está al acecho como un ladrón, y aumenta los
infieles entre los hombres. \footnote{\textbf{23:28} Prov 7,12}
\bibleverse{29} ¿Quién se lamenta? ¿Quién tiene pena? ¿Quién tiene
conflictos? ¿Quién tiene quejas? ¿Quién tiene moretones innecesarios?
¿Quién tiene los ojos inyectados en sangre? \footnote{\textbf{23:29}
  Prov 21,17; Prov 20,13} \bibleverse{30} Los que se quedan mucho tiempo
en el vino; los que van a buscar vino mezclado. \footnote{\textbf{23:30}
  Prov 20,1; Is 5,11; Is 5,22} \bibleverse{31} No mires el vino cuando
está rojo, cuando brilla en la taza, cuando baja sin problemas.
\bibleverse{32} Al final, muerde como una serpiente, y envenena como una
víbora. \bibleverse{33} Tus ojos verán cosas extrañas, y tu mente
imaginará cosas confusas. \bibleverse{34} Sí, serás como el que se
acuesta en medio del mar, o como el que se acuesta encima de los
aparejos: \bibleverse{35} ``¡Me golpearon, y no me hirieron! ¡Me golpean
y no lo siento! ¿Cuándo me despertaré? Puedo hacerlo de nuevo. Buscaré
más''. \footnote{\textbf{23:35} Is 56,12}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-45}{%
\section{23}\label{section-45}}

\bibleverse{1} When you sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently
what is before you; \bibleverse{2} put a knife to your throat if you are
a man given to appetite. \bibleverse{3} Don't be desirous of his
dainties, since they are deceitful food. \bibleverse{4} Don't weary
yourself to be rich. In your wisdom, show restraint. \bibleverse{5} Why
do you set your eyes on that which is not? For it certainly sprouts
wings like an eagle and flies in the sky. \bibleverse{6} Don't eat the
food of him who has a stingy eye, and don't crave his delicacies,
\bibleverse{7} for as he thinks about the cost, so he is. ``Eat and
drink!'' he says to you, but his heart is not with you. \bibleverse{8}
You will vomit up the morsel which you have eaten and waste your
pleasant words. \bibleverse{9} Don't speak in the ears of a fool, for he
will despise the wisdom of your words. \bibleverse{10} Don't move the
ancient boundary stone. Don't encroach on the fields of the fatherless,
\bibleverse{11} for their Defender is strong. He will plead their case
against you. \bibleverse{12} Apply your heart to instruction, and your
ears to the words of knowledge. \bibleverse{13} Don't withhold
correction from a child. If you punish him with the rod, he will not
die. \bibleverse{14} Punish him with the rod, and save his soul from
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{23:14} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
\bibleverse{15} My son, if your heart is wise, then my heart will be
glad, even mine. \bibleverse{16} Yes, my heart will rejoice when your
lips speak what is right. \bibleverse{17} Don't let your heart envy
sinners, but rather fear Yahweh all day long. \bibleverse{18} Indeed
surely there is a future hope, and your hope will not be cut off.
\bibleverse{19} Listen, my son, and be wise, and keep your heart on the
right path! \bibleverse{20} Don't be among ones drinking too much wine,
or those who gorge themselves on meat; \bibleverse{21} for the drunkard
and the glutton shall become poor; and drowsiness clothes them in rags.
\bibleverse{22} Listen to your father who gave you life, and don't
despise your mother when she is old. \bibleverse{23} Buy the truth, and
don't sell it. Get wisdom, discipline, and understanding.
\bibleverse{24} The father of the righteous has great joy. Whoever
fathers a wise child delights in him. \bibleverse{25} Let your father
and your mother be glad! Let her who bore you rejoice! \bibleverse{26}
My son, give me your heart; and let your eyes keep in my ways.
\bibleverse{27} For a prostitute is a deep pit; and a wayward wife is a
narrow well. \bibleverse{28} Yes, she lies in wait like a robber, and
increases the unfaithful among men. \bibleverse{29} Who has woe? Who has
sorrow? Who has strife? Who has complaints? Who has needless bruises?
Who has bloodshot eyes? \bibleverse{30} Those who stay long at the wine;
those who go to seek out mixed wine. \bibleverse{31} Don't look at the
wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down
smoothly. \bibleverse{32} In the end, it bites like a snake, and poisons
like a viper. \bibleverse{33} Your eyes will see strange things, and
your mind will imagine confusing things. \bibleverse{34} Yes, you will
be as he who lies down in the middle of the sea, or as he who lies on
top of the rigging: \bibleverse{35} ``They hit me, and I was not hurt!
They beat me, and I don't feel it! When will I wake up? I can do it
again. I will look for more.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-46}{%
\section{24}\label{section-46}}

\bibleverse{1} No tengas envidia de los hombres malos, ni el deseo de
estar con ellos; \bibleverse{2} para que sus corazones traman la
violenciay sus labios hablan de travesuras. \bibleverse{3} A través de
la sabiduría se construye una casa; mediante la comprensión se
establece; \bibleverse{4} por conocimiento las habitaciones se llenancon
todos los tesoros raros y hermosos. \footnote{\textbf{24:4} Prov
  31,10-31} \bibleverse{5} Un hombre sabio tiene un gran poder. Un
hombre con conocimientos aumenta la fuerza, \bibleverse{6} pues con una
sabia guía libras tu guerra, y la victoria está en muchos asesores.
\footnote{\textbf{24:6} Prov 20,18; Prov 11,14} \bibleverse{7} La
sabiduría es demasiado elevada para un tonto. No abre la boca en la
puerta. \bibleverse{8} El que conspira para hacer el malse le llamará
intrigante. \bibleverse{9} Los planes de la locura son pecado. El
burlador es detestado por los hombres. \bibleverse{10} Si flaqueas en el
momento de la dificultad, tu fuerza es pequeña. \bibleverse{11} ¡Rescata
a los que están siendo llevados a la muerte! En efecto, ¡retened a los
que se tambalean hacia la matanza! \footnote{\textbf{24:11} Job 29,12;
  Sal 82,4} \bibleverse{12} Si dices: ``He aquí que no sabíamos
esto''¿acaso el que pesa los corazones no lo considera? El que guarda tu
alma, ¿no lo sabe? ¿No ha de dar a cada uno según su trabajo?
\footnote{\textbf{24:12} Prov 16,2; 1Sam 16,7; Rom 2,6} \bibleverse{13}
Hijo mío, come miel, porque es buena, los excrementos del panal, que son
dulces a su gusto; \bibleverse{14} así conocerás que la sabiduría es
para tu alma. Si lo has encontrado, habrá una recompensa: Su esperanza
no será cortada. \footnote{\textbf{24:14} Prov 23,18} \bibleverse{15} No
aceches, malvado, contra la morada de los justos. No destruyas su lugar
de descanso; \bibleverse{16} porque el justo cae siete veces y se
levanta, pero los malvados son derribados por la calamidad. \footnote{\textbf{24:16}
  Job 5,19; Sal 37,24} \bibleverse{17} No te alegres cuando tu enemigo
caiga. No dejes que tu corazón se alegre cuando sea derrocado,
\footnote{\textbf{24:17} Job 31,29} \bibleverse{18} no sea que Yahvé lo
vea y le desagrade, y aleja de él su ira. \bibleverse{19} No te
preocupes por los malhechores, ni tengas envidia de los malvados;
\footnote{\textbf{24:19} Prov 3,31; Sal 37,1; Sal 73,3} \bibleverse{20}
porque no habrá recompensa para el hombre malo. La lámpara de los
malvados se apagará. \footnote{\textbf{24:20} Prov 13,9} \bibleverse{21}
Hijo mío, teme a Yahvé y al rey. No te unas a los rebeldes, \footnote{\textbf{24:21}
  1Pe 2,17} \bibleverse{22} porque su calamidad surgirá de repente.
¿Quién sabe qué destrucción puede venir de ambos? \footnote{\textbf{24:22}
  Rom 13,2}

\hypertarget{segunda-colecciuxf3n-de-dichos-de-los-sabios}{%
\subsection{Segunda colección de dichos de los
sabios}\label{segunda-colecciuxf3n-de-dichos-de-los-sabios}}

\bibleverse{23} Estos son también los dichos de los sabios: Mostrar
parcialidad en el juicio no es bueno. \footnote{\textbf{24:23} Lev 19,15}
\bibleverse{24} El que dice al impío: ``Eres justo''los pueblos lo
maldecirán, y las naciones lo aborrecerán --- \bibleverse{25} pero les
irá bien a los que condenen a los culpables, y una rica bendición vendrá
sobre ellos. \bibleverse{26} Una respuesta sinceraes como un beso en los
labios. \footnote{\textbf{24:26} Prov 15,23} \bibleverse{27} Prepara tu
trabajo en el exterior, y preparen sus campos. Después, construye tu
casa. \bibleverse{28} No seas testigo contra tu prójimo sin motivo. No
engañes con tus labios. \footnote{\textbf{24:28} Prov 19,5}
\bibleverse{29} No digas: ``Haré con él lo que él ha hecho conmigo'';
Pagaré al hombre según su trabajo''. \footnote{\textbf{24:29} Prov 20,22}
\bibleverse{30} Pasé por el campo del perezoso, por la viña del hombre
vacío de entendimiento. \bibleverse{31} He aquí que todo estaba cubierto
de espinas. Su superficie estaba cubierta de ortigas, y su muro de
piedra fue derribado. \bibleverse{32} Entonces vi, y consideré bien. Vi
y recibí instrucción: \bibleverse{33} un poco de sueño, un poco de
sopor, un pequeño pliegue de las manos para dormir, \footnote{\textbf{24:33}
  Prov 6,9-11} \bibleverse{34} por lo que su pobreza vendrá como un
ladróny su necesidad como hombre armado. \footnote{\textbf{24:34} Prov
  10,4}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-47}{%
\section{24}\label{section-47}}

\bibleverse{1} Don't be envious of evil men, neither desire to be with
them; \bibleverse{2} for their hearts plot violence and their lips talk
about mischief. \bibleverse{3} Through wisdom a house is built; by
understanding it is established; \bibleverse{4} by knowledge the rooms
are filled with all rare and beautiful treasure. \bibleverse{5} A wise
man has great power. A knowledgeable man increases strength,
\bibleverse{6} for by wise guidance you wage your war, and victory is in
many advisors. \bibleverse{7} Wisdom is too high for a fool. He doesn't
open his mouth in the gate. \bibleverse{8} One who plots to do evil will
be called a schemer. \bibleverse{9} The schemes of folly are sin. The
mocker is detested by men. \bibleverse{10} If you falter in the time of
trouble, your strength is small. \bibleverse{11} Rescue those who are
being led away to death! Indeed, hold back those who are staggering to
the slaughter! \bibleverse{12} If you say, ``Behold, we didn't know
this,'' doesn't he who weighs the hearts consider it? He who keeps your
soul, doesn't he know it? Shall he not render to every man according to
his work? \bibleverse{13} My son, eat honey, for it is good, the
droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to your taste;
\bibleverse{14} so you shall know wisdom to be to your soul. If you have
found it, then there will be a reward: Your hope will not be cut off.
\bibleverse{15} Don't lay in wait, wicked man, against the habitation of
the righteous. Don't destroy his resting place; \bibleverse{16} for a
righteous man falls seven times and rises up again, but the wicked are
overthrown by calamity. \bibleverse{17} Don't rejoice when your enemy
falls. Don't let your heart be glad when he is overthrown,
\bibleverse{18} lest Yahweh see it, and it displease him, and he turn
away his wrath from him. \bibleverse{19} Don't fret yourself because of
evildoers, neither be envious of the wicked; \bibleverse{20} for there
will be no reward to the evil man. The lamp of the wicked will be
snuffed out. \bibleverse{21} My son, fear Yahweh and the king. Don't
join those who are rebellious, \bibleverse{22} for their calamity will
rise suddenly. Who knows what destruction may come from them both?

\hypertarget{second-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise}{%
\subsection{Second collection of sayings of the
wise}\label{second-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise}}

\bibleverse{23} These also are sayings of the wise: To show partiality
in judgment is not good. \bibleverse{24} He who says to the wicked,
``You are righteous,'' peoples will curse him, and nations will abhor
him--- \bibleverse{25} but it will go well with those who convict the
guilty, and a rich blessing will come on them. \bibleverse{26} An honest
answer is like a kiss on the lips. \bibleverse{27} Prepare your work
outside, and get your fields ready. Afterwards, build your house.
\bibleverse{28} Don't be a witness against your neighbor without cause.
Don't deceive with your lips. \bibleverse{29} Don't say, ``I will do to
him as he has done to me; I will repay the man according to his work.''
\bibleverse{30} I went by the field of the sluggard, by the vineyard of
the man void of understanding. \bibleverse{31} Behold, it was all grown
over with thorns. Its surface was covered with nettles, and its stone
wall was broken down. \bibleverse{32} Then I saw, and considered well. I
saw, and received instruction: \bibleverse{33} a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, \bibleverse{34} so your
poverty will come as a robber and your want as an armed man.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{tercera-colecciuxf3n-de-proverbios-de-salomuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Tercera colección de Proverbios de
Salomón}\label{tercera-colecciuxf3n-de-proverbios-de-salomuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-48}{%
\section{25}\label{section-48}}

\bibleverse{1} Estos también son proverbios de Salomón, que los hombres
de Ezequías, rey de Judá, copiaron. \bibleverse{2} Es la gloria de Dios
ocultar una cosa, pero la gloria de los reyes es buscar un asunto.
\bibleverse{3} Como los cielos en altura y la tierra en profundidad, así
que el corazón de los reyes es inescrutable. \bibleverse{4} Quita la
escoria de la plata, y sale material para el refinador. \bibleverse{5}
Aleja a los malvados de la presencia del rey, y su trono será
establecido en la justicia. \footnote{\textbf{25:5} Prov 16,12}
\bibleverse{6} No te exaltes en presencia del rey, o reclamar un lugar
entre los grandes hombres; \bibleverse{7} porque es mejor que se te
diga: ``Sube aquí''. que ser rebajado en presencia del príncipe, que tus
ojos han visto. \footnote{\textbf{25:7} Luc 14,7-11} \bibleverse{8} No
te precipites a la hora de presentar cargos ante los tribunales. ¿Qué
harás al final cuando tu vecino te avergüence? \bibleverse{9} Debate tu
caso con tu vecino, y no traicionar la confianza de otro, \footnote{\textbf{25:9}
  Prov 20,19} \bibleverse{10} para que quien lo oiga no te avergüence, y
tu mala reputación nunca se aleja. \bibleverse{11} Una palabra bien
dichaes como las manzanas de oro en los engastes de plata. \footnote{\textbf{25:11}
  Prov 15,23} \bibleverse{12} Como un pendiente de oro, y un adorno de
oro fino, así es un sabio reprendedor para un oído obediente.
\bibleverse{13} Como el frío de la nieve en el tiempo de la cosecha, así
es un mensajero fiel a los que le envían; porque refresca el alma de sus
amos. \bibleverse{14} Como nubes y viento sin lluvia, así es el que
presume de dones engañosamente. \footnote{\textbf{25:14} 2Pe 2,17}
\bibleverse{15} Con la paciencia se persuade al gobernante. Una lengua
blanda rompe el hueso. \footnote{\textbf{25:15} Prov 15,1}
\bibleverse{16} ¿Has encontrado miel? Come todo lo que sea suficiente
para ti, para que no comas demasiado y lo vomites. \bibleverse{17} Que
tu pie esté rara vez en la casa de tu vecino, para que no se canse de ti
y te odie. \bibleverse{18} El hombre que da falso testimonio contra su
prójimoes como un garrote, una espada o una flecha afilada. \footnote{\textbf{25:18}
  Prov 19,5} \bibleverse{19} Confianza en alguien infiel en tiempos de
dificultades como un diente malo o un pie cojo. \bibleverse{20} Como
quien se quita una prenda en tiempo de frío, o vinagre sobre soda, así
es el que canta canciones a un corazón pesado. \bibleverse{21} Si tu
enemigo tiene hambre, dale de comer. Si tiene sed, dale de beber agua;
\footnote{\textbf{25:21} Rom 12,20; Mat 5,44} \bibleverse{22} porque
amontonarás ascuas de fuego sobre su cabeza, y Yahvé te recompensará.
\bibleverse{23} El viento del norte produce lluvia; por lo que una
lengua maliciosa trae una cara enojada. \bibleverse{24} Es mejor habitar
en el rincón de la azoteaque compartir una casa con una mujer
contenciosa. \footnote{\textbf{25:24} Prov 21,9; Prov 21,19}
\bibleverse{25} Como agua fría al alma sedienta, por lo que son buenas
noticias de un país lejano. \bibleverse{26} Como un manantial enturbiado
y un pozo contaminado, así es el justo que cede ante el malvado.
\bibleverse{27} No es bueno comer mucha miel, ni es honorable buscar el
propio honor. \bibleverse{28} Como una ciudad derruida y sin muroses un
hombre cuyo espíritu no tiene freno. \footnote{\textbf{25:28} Prov 29,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{third-collection-of-proverbs-of-solomon}{%
\subsection{Third collection of Proverbs of
Solomon}\label{third-collection-of-proverbs-of-solomon}}

\hypertarget{section-49}{%
\section{25}\label{section-49}}

\bibleverse{1} These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of
Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. \bibleverse{2} It is the glory of God
to conceal a thing, but the glory of kings is to search out a matter.
\bibleverse{3} As the heavens for height, and the earth for depth, so
the hearts of kings are unsearchable. \bibleverse{4} Take away the dross
from the silver, and material comes out for the refiner. \bibleverse{5}
Take away the wicked from the king's presence, and his throne will be
established in righteousness. \bibleverse{6} Don't exalt yourself in the
presence of the king, or claim a place among great men; \bibleverse{7}
for it is better that it be said to you, ``Come up here,'' than that you
should be put lower in the presence of the prince, whom your eyes have
seen. \bibleverse{8} Don't be hasty in bringing charges to court. What
will you do in the end when your neighbor shames you? \bibleverse{9}
Debate your case with your neighbor, and don't betray the confidence of
another, \bibleverse{10} lest one who hears it put you to shame, and
your bad reputation never depart. \bibleverse{11} A word fitly spoken is
like apples of gold in settings of silver. \bibleverse{12} As an earring
of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover to an
obedient ear. \bibleverse{13} As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, so is a faithful messenger to those who send him; for he
refreshes the soul of his masters. \bibleverse{14} As clouds and wind
without rain, so is he who boasts of gifts deceptively. \bibleverse{15}
By patience a ruler is persuaded. A soft tongue breaks the bone.
\bibleverse{16} Have you found honey? Eat as much as is sufficient for
you, lest you eat too much, and vomit it. \bibleverse{17} Let your foot
be seldom in your neighbor's house, lest he be weary of you, and hate
you. \bibleverse{18} A man who gives false testimony against his
neighbor is like a club, a sword, or a sharp arrow. \bibleverse{19}
Confidence in someone unfaithful in time of trouble is like a bad tooth
or a lame foot. \bibleverse{20} As one who takes away a garment in cold
weather, or vinegar on soda, so is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.
\bibleverse{21} If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat. If he is
thirsty, give him water to drink; \bibleverse{22} for you will heap
coals of fire on his head, and Yahweh will reward you. \bibleverse{23}
The north wind produces rain; so a backbiting tongue brings an angry
face. \bibleverse{24} It is better to dwell in the corner of the
housetop than to share a house with a contentious woman. \bibleverse{25}
Like cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
\bibleverse{26} Like a muddied spring and a polluted well, so is a
righteous man who gives way before the wicked. \bibleverse{27} It is not
good to eat much honey, nor is it honorable to seek one's own honor.
\bibleverse{28} Like a city that is broken down and without walls is a
man whose spirit is without restraint.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-50}{%
\section{26}\label{section-50}}

\bibleverse{1} Como la nieve en verano, y como la lluvia en la cosecha,
por lo que el honor no es propio de un tonto. \footnote{\textbf{26:1}
  Prov 26,8} \bibleverse{2} Como un gorrión que revolotea, como una
golondrina, para que la maldición inmerecida no llegue a su fin.
\bibleverse{3} El látigo es para el caballo, una brida para el burro, ¡y
una vara para la espalda de los tontos! \footnote{\textbf{26:3} Sal
  32,9; Prov 10,13} \bibleverse{4} No respondas al necio según su
necedad, para que no seáis también como él. \bibleverse{5} Responde al
necio según su necedad, para no ser sabio en sus propios ojos.
\bibleverse{6} El que envía un mensaje de la mano de un tontoes cortar
los pies y beber con violencia. \bibleverse{7} Como las piernas de los
cojos que cuelgan sueltas, así es una parábola en boca de los tontos.
\bibleverse{8} Como quien ata una piedra en una honda, así es el que da
honor a un tonto. \footnote{\textbf{26:8} Prov 26,1} \bibleverse{9} Como
un arbusto de espinas que va a la mano de un borracho, así es una
parábola en boca de los tontos. \bibleverse{10} Como un arquero que
hiere a todos, así es el que contrata a un tontoo el que contrata a los
que pasan. \bibleverse{11} Como un perro que vuelve a su vómito, así es
un tonto que repite su locura. \footnote{\textbf{26:11} 2Pe 2,22}
\bibleverse{12} ¿Ves a un hombre sabio en sus propios ojos? Hay más
esperanza para un tonto que para él. \footnote{\textbf{26:12} Prov 3,7}
\bibleverse{13} El perezoso dice: ``¡Hay un león en el camino! Un león
feroz recorre las calles''. \footnote{\textbf{26:13} Prov 22,13}
\bibleverse{14} Mientras la puerta gira sobre sus goznes, también lo
hace el perezoso en su cama. \footnote{\textbf{26:14} Prov 6,9-11}
\bibleverse{15} El perezoso entierra su mano en el plato. Es demasiado
perezoso para llevárselo a la boca. \footnote{\textbf{26:15} Prov 19,24}
\bibleverse{16} El perezoso es más sabio a sus propios ojosque siete
hombres que responden con discreción. \bibleverse{17} Como quien agarra
las orejas de un perroes el que pasa y se entromete en una disputa que
no es la suya. \bibleverse{18} Como un loco que dispara antorchas,
flechas y muerte, \bibleverse{19} es el hombre que engaña a su prójimo y
dice: ``¿No estoy bromeando?'' \bibleverse{20} Por falta de leña se
apaga el fuego. Sin chismes, una pelea se apaga. \footnote{\textbf{26:20}
  Prov 22,10} \bibleverse{21} Como los carbones a las brasas, y leña al
fuego, así que es un hombre contencioso para encender el conflicto.
\footnote{\textbf{26:21} Prov 15,18} \bibleverse{22} Las palabras de un
susurrador son como bocados delicados, bajan a las partes más internas.
\footnote{\textbf{26:22} Prov 18,8} \bibleverse{23} Como escoria de
plata en una vasija de barroson los labios de un ferviente con un
corazón malvado. \bibleverse{24} El hombre malicioso se disfraza con sus
labios, pero alberga el mal en su corazón. \bibleverse{25} Cuando su
discurso es encantador, no le creas, porque hay siete abominaciones en
su corazón. \bibleverse{26} Su malicia puede ser ocultada por el engaño,
pero su maldad será expuesta en la asamblea. \bibleverse{27} El que cava
una fosa caerá en ella. Quien hace rodar una piedra, se vuelve contra
él. \footnote{\textbf{26:27} Sal 7,15; Ecl 10,8} \bibleverse{28} La
lengua mentirosa odia a los que hiere; y una boca halagadora trabaja la
ruina.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-51}{%
\section{26}\label{section-51}}

\bibleverse{1} Like snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honor is
not fitting for a fool. \bibleverse{2} Like a fluttering sparrow, like a
darting swallow, so the undeserved curse doesn't come to rest.
\bibleverse{3} A whip is for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and a
rod for the back of fools! \bibleverse{4} Don't answer a fool according
to his folly, lest you also be like him. \bibleverse{5} Answer a fool
according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes. \bibleverse{6}
One who sends a message by the hand of a fool is cutting off feet and
drinking violence. \bibleverse{7} Like the legs of the lame that hang
loose, so is a parable in the mouth of fools. \bibleverse{8} As one who
binds a stone in a sling, so is he who gives honor to a fool.
\bibleverse{9} Like a thorn bush that goes into the hand of a drunkard,
so is a parable in the mouth of fools. \bibleverse{10} As an archer who
wounds all, so is he who hires a fool or he who hires those who pass by.
\bibleverse{11} As a dog that returns to his vomit, so is a fool who
repeats his folly. \bibleverse{12} Do you see a man wise in his own
eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him. \bibleverse{13} The
sluggard says, ``There is a lion in the road! A fierce lion roams the
streets!'' \bibleverse{14} As the door turns on its hinges, so does the
sluggard on his bed. \bibleverse{15} The sluggard buries his hand in the
dish. He is too lazy to bring it back to his mouth. \bibleverse{16} The
sluggard is wiser in his own eyes than seven men who answer with
discretion. \bibleverse{17} Like one who grabs a dog's ears is one who
passes by and meddles in a quarrel not his own. \bibleverse{18} Like a
madman who shoots torches, arrows, and death, \bibleverse{19} is the man
who deceives his neighbor and says, ``Am I not joking?'' \bibleverse{20}
For lack of wood a fire goes out. Without gossip, a quarrel dies down.
\bibleverse{21} As coals are to hot embers, and wood to fire, so is a
contentious man to kindling strife. \bibleverse{22} The words of a
whisperer are as dainty morsels, they go down into the innermost parts.
\bibleverse{23} Like silver dross on an earthen vessel are the lips of a
fervent one with an evil heart. \bibleverse{24} A malicious man
disguises himself with his lips, but he harbors evil in his heart.
\bibleverse{25} When his speech is charming, don't believe him, for
there are seven abominations in his heart. \bibleverse{26} His malice
may be concealed by deception, but his wickedness will be exposed in the
assembly. \bibleverse{27} Whoever digs a pit shall fall into it. Whoever
rolls a stone, it will come back on him. \bibleverse{28} A lying tongue
hates those it hurts; and a flattering mouth works ruin.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-52}{%
\section{27}\label{section-52}}

\bibleverse{1} No te jactes del mañana; porque no sabes lo que puede
traer un día. \footnote{\textbf{27:1} Sant 4,13; Sant 1,4-14}
\bibleverse{2} Que otro hombre te alabe, y no su propia boca; un
extraño, y no tus propios labios. \footnote{\textbf{27:2} 2Cor 10,12}
\bibleverse{3} Una piedra es pesada, y la arena es una carga; pero la
provocación de un tonto es más pesada que ambas. \bibleverse{4} La ira
es cruel, y la ira es abrumadora; pero, ¿quién es capaz de enfrentarse a
los celos? \bibleverse{5} Mejor es la reprimenda abiertaque el amor
oculto. \bibleverse{6} Las heridas de un amigo son fieles, aunque los
besos de un enemigo sean profusos. \footnote{\textbf{27:6} Sal 141,5}
\bibleverse{7} Un alma llena aborrece un panal; pero para un alma
hambrienta, todo lo amargo es dulce. \bibleverse{8} Como un pájaro que
se aleja de su nido, así es un hombre que se aleja de su hogar.
\bibleverse{9} El perfume y el incienso alegran el corazón; también lo
hace el consejo sincero de un amigo. \bibleverse{10} No abandones a tu
amigo y al amigo de tu padre. No vayas a la casa de tu hermano en el día
de tu desastre. Un vecino cercano es mejor que un hermano lejano.
\footnote{\textbf{27:10} Prov 14,20} \bibleverse{11} Sé sabio, hijo mío,
y trae alegría a mi corazón, entonces puedo responder a mi atormentador.
\bibleverse{12} Un hombre prudente ve el peligro y se refugia; pero los
simples pasan, y sufren por ello. \footnote{\textbf{27:12} Prov 21,29;
  Prov 22,3} \bibleverse{13} Toma su prenda cuando pone una garantía
para un extranjero. ¡Sosténgalo por una mujer caprichosa! \footnote{\textbf{27:13}
  Prov 20,16} \bibleverse{14} El que bendice a su prójimo en voz alta
por la mañana, será tomado como una maldición por él. \bibleverse{15}
Una gota continua en un día de lluviay una esposa contenciosa son
iguales: \footnote{\textbf{27:15} Prov 19,13; Prov 25,24}
\bibleverse{16} contenerla es como contener el viento, o como agarrar
aceite en su mano derecha. \bibleverse{17} El hierro afila el hierro;
así un hombre agudiza el semblante de su amigo. \bibleverse{18} El que
cuide la higuera comerá su fruto. El que cuida a su amo será honrado.
\bibleverse{19} Como el agua refleja un rostro, por lo que el corazón de
un hombre refleja al hombre. \bibleverse{20} El Seol\footnote{\textbf{27:20}
  El Seol es el lugar de los muertos.} y Abadón nunca están satisfechos;
y los ojos de un hombre nunca están satisfechos. \footnote{\textbf{27:20}
  Prov 30,15-16; Ecl 1,8} \bibleverse{21} El crisol es para la plata, y
el horno para el oro; pero el hombre es refinado por su alabanza.
\bibleverse{22} Aunque muelas a un tonto en un mortero con un pilón
junto con el grano, sin embargo, no se le quitará su necedad.
\bibleverse{23} Conoce bien el estado de tus rebaños, y presta atención
a tus rebaños, \bibleverse{24} porque las riquezas no son eternas, ni la
corona perdura en todas las generaciones. \footnote{\textbf{27:24} 1Tim
  6,7} \bibleverse{25} Se quita el heno y aparece el nuevo crecimiento,
los pastos de las colinas se recogen. \bibleverse{26} Los corderos son
para tu ropa, y las cabras son el precio de un campo. \bibleverse{27}
Allíhabrá mucha leche de cabra para su alimentación, para la
alimentación de su familia, y para la alimentación de sus sirvientas.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-53}{%
\section{27}\label{section-53}}

\bibleverse{1} Don't boast about tomorrow; for you don't know what a day
may bring. \bibleverse{2} Let another man praise you, and not your own
mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips. \bibleverse{3} A stone is
heavy, and sand is a burden; but a fool's provocation is heavier than
both. \bibleverse{4} Wrath is cruel, and anger is overwhelming; but who
is able to stand before jealousy? \bibleverse{5} Better is open rebuke
than hidden love. \bibleverse{6} The wounds of a friend are faithful,
although the kisses of an enemy are profuse. \bibleverse{7} A full soul
loathes a honeycomb; but to a hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet.
\bibleverse{8} As a bird that wanders from her nest, so is a man who
wanders from his home. \bibleverse{9} Perfume and incense bring joy to
the heart; so does earnest counsel from a man's friend. \bibleverse{10}
Don't forsake your friend and your father's friend. Don't go to your
brother's house in the day of your disaster. A neighbor who is near is
better than a distant brother. \bibleverse{11} Be wise, my son, and
bring joy to my heart, then I can answer my tormentor. \bibleverse{12} A
prudent man sees danger and takes refuge; but the simple pass on, and
suffer for it. \bibleverse{13} Take his garment when he puts up
collateral for a stranger. Hold it for a wayward woman! \bibleverse{14}
He who blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning, it
will be taken as a curse by him. \bibleverse{15} A continual dropping on
a rainy day and a contentious wife are alike: \bibleverse{16}
restraining her is like restraining the wind, or like grasping oil in
his right hand. \bibleverse{17} Iron sharpens iron; so a man sharpens
his friend's countenance. \bibleverse{18} Whoever tends the fig tree
shall eat its fruit. He who looks after his master shall be honored.
\bibleverse{19} Like water reflects a face, so a man's heart reflects
the man. \bibleverse{20} Sheol\footnote{\textbf{27:20} Sheol is the
  place of the dead.} and Abaddon are never satisfied; and a man's eyes
are never satisfied. \bibleverse{21} The crucible is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; but man is refined by his praise. \bibleverse{22}
Though you grind a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with grain, yet
his foolishness will not be removed from him. \bibleverse{23} Know well
the state of your flocks, and pay attention to your herds,
\bibleverse{24} for riches are not forever, nor does the crown endure to
all generations. \bibleverse{25} The hay is removed, and the new growth
appears, the grasses of the hills are gathered in. \bibleverse{26} The
lambs are for your clothing, and the goats are the price of a field.
\bibleverse{27} There will be plenty of goats' milk for your food, for
your family's food, and for the nourishment of your servant girls.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-54}{%
\section{28}\label{section-54}}

\bibleverse{1} Los malvados huyen cuando nadie los persigue; pero los
justos son audaces como un león. \bibleverse{2} En la rebelión, una
tierra tiene muchos gobernantes, pero el orden es mantenido por un
hombre de entendimiento y conocimiento. \bibleverse{3} Un necesitado que
oprime a los pobreses como una lluvia torrencial que no deja cosechas.
\bibleverse{4} Los que abandonan la ley alaban a los malvados; pero los
que guardan la ley se enfrentan a ellos. \footnote{\textbf{28:4} Sal
  49,13} \bibleverse{5} Los hombres malvados no entienden la justicia;
pero los que buscan a Yahvé lo comprenden plenamente. \bibleverse{6}
Mejor es el pobre que camina en su integridadque el que es perverso en
sus caminos, y es rico. \footnote{\textbf{28:6} Prov 19,1}
\bibleverse{7} El que guarda la ley es un hijo sabio; pero el que es
compañero de los glotones avergüenza a su padre. \bibleverse{8} El que
aumenta su riqueza con intereses excesivoslo recoge para quien se apiada
de los pobres. \footnote{\textbf{28:8} Prov 13,22} \bibleverse{9} El que
aparta su oído para no oír la ley, incluso su oración es una
abominación. \footnote{\textbf{28:9} Prov 21,27} \bibleverse{10} El que
hace que los rectos se extravíen por el mal camino, caerá en su propia
trampa; pero los irreprochables heredarán el bien. \bibleverse{11} El
rico es sabio a sus propios ojos; pero el pobre que tiene entendimiento
ve a través de él. \bibleverse{12} Cuando los justos triunfan, hay gran
gloria; pero cuando los malvados se levantan, los hombres se esconden.
\footnote{\textbf{28:12} Prov 11,10-11} \bibleverse{13} El que oculta
sus pecados no prospera, pero quien se confiesa y renuncia a ellos
encuentra la misericordia. \footnote{\textbf{28:13} Sal 32,3-5; 1Jn 1,8;
  1Jn 1,1-9} \bibleverse{14} Dichoso el hombre que siempre teme; pero el
que endurece su corazón cae en el problema. \bibleverse{15} Como un león
que ruge o un oso que embiste, así es un gobernante malvado sobre gente
indefensa. \bibleverse{16} Un gobernante tirano carece de juicio. Quien
odia la ganancia mal habida tendrá días largos. \bibleverse{17} El
hombre atormentado por la culpa de la sangre será un fugitivo hasta la
muerte. Nadie lo apoyará. \footnote{\textbf{28:17} Gén 4,14}
\bibleverse{18} Quien camina sin culpa se mantiene a salvo; pero uno con
caminos perversos caerá de repente. \bibleverse{19} El que trabaja su
tierra tendrá abundancia de alimentos; pero el que persigue fantasías se
saciará de pobreza. \footnote{\textbf{28:19} Prov 6,6-11; Prov 10,4;
  Prov 12,11} \bibleverse{20} Un hombre fiel es rico en bendiciones;
pero el que está ansioso por ser rico no quedará impune. \footnote{\textbf{28:20}
  Prov 28,22; Prov 20,21} \bibleverse{21} Mostrar parcialidad no es
bueno, pero un hombre hará el mal por un pedazo de pan. \bibleverse{22}
El hombre tacaño se apresura a buscar las riquezas, y no sabe que la
pobreza le espera. \footnote{\textbf{28:22} Prov 28,20; Prov 23,4; 1Tim
  6,9} \bibleverse{23} El que reprende a un hombre encontrará después
más favorque el que adula con la lengua. \bibleverse{24} El que roba a
su padre o a su madre y dice: ``No está mal''. es un socio con un
destructor. \footnote{\textbf{28:24} Mat 15,5} \bibleverse{25} El que es
codicioso suscita conflictos; pero el que confía en Yahvé prosperará.
\bibleverse{26} El que confía en sí mismo es un necio; pero el que
camina en la sabiduría se mantiene a salvo. \footnote{\textbf{28:26}
  Prov 3,5} \bibleverse{27} Al que da a los pobres no le falta nada;
pero el que cierra los ojos tendrá muchas maldiciones. \footnote{\textbf{28:27}
  2Cor 9,6; 2Cor 9,9} \bibleverse{28} Cuando los malvados se levantan,
los hombres se esconden; pero cuando perecen, los justos prosperan.
\footnote{\textbf{28:28} Prov 29,2}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-55}{%
\section{28}\label{section-55}}

\bibleverse{1} The wicked flee when no one pursues; but the righteous
are as bold as a lion. \bibleverse{2} In rebellion, a land has many
rulers, but order is maintained by a man of understanding and knowledge.
\bibleverse{3} A needy man who oppresses the poor is like a driving rain
which leaves no crops. \bibleverse{4} Those who forsake the law praise
the wicked; but those who keep the law contend with them. \bibleverse{5}
Evil men don't understand justice; but those who seek Yahweh understand
it fully. \bibleverse{6} Better is the poor who walks in his integrity
than he who is perverse in his ways, and he is rich. \bibleverse{7}
Whoever keeps the law is a wise son; but he who is a companion of
gluttons shames his father. \bibleverse{8} He who increases his wealth
by excessive interest gathers it for one who has pity on the poor.
\bibleverse{9} He who turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayer is an abomination. \bibleverse{10} Whoever causes the upright to
go astray in an evil way, he will fall into his own trap; but the
blameless will inherit good. \bibleverse{11} The rich man is wise in his
own eyes; but the poor who has understanding sees through him.
\bibleverse{12} When the righteous triumph, there is great glory; but
when the wicked rise, men hide themselves. \bibleverse{13} He who
conceals his sins doesn't prosper, but whoever confesses and renounces
them finds mercy. \bibleverse{14} Blessed is the man who always fears;
but one who hardens his heart falls into trouble. \bibleverse{15} As a
roaring lion or a charging bear, so is a wicked ruler over helpless
people. \bibleverse{16} A tyrannical ruler lacks judgment. One who hates
ill-gotten gain will have long days. \bibleverse{17} A man who is
tormented by blood guilt will be a fugitive until death. No one will
support him. \bibleverse{18} Whoever walks blamelessly is kept safe; but
one with perverse ways will fall suddenly. \bibleverse{19} One who works
his land will have an abundance of food; but one who chases fantasies
will have his fill of poverty. \bibleverse{20} A faithful man is rich
with blessings; but one who is eager to be rich will not go unpunished.
\bibleverse{21} To show partiality is not good, yet a man will do wrong
for a piece of bread. \bibleverse{22} A stingy man hurries after riches,
and doesn't know that poverty waits for him. \bibleverse{23} One who
rebukes a man will afterward find more favor than one who flatters with
the tongue. \bibleverse{24} Whoever robs his father or his mother and
says, ``It's not wrong,'' is a partner with a destroyer. \bibleverse{25}
One who is greedy stirs up strife; but one who trusts in Yahweh will
prosper. \bibleverse{26} One who trusts in himself is a fool; but one
who walks in wisdom is kept safe. \bibleverse{27} One who gives to the
poor has no lack; but one who closes his eyes will have many curses.
\bibleverse{28} When the wicked rise, men hide themselves; but when they
perish, the righteous thrive.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-56}{%
\section{29}\label{section-56}}

\bibleverse{1} El que a menudo es reprendido y endurece su cuelloserá
destruido de repente, sin remedio. \footnote{\textbf{29:1} Prov 15,10}
\bibleverse{2} Cuando los justos prosperan, el pueblo se alegra; pero
cuando los malvados gobiernan, el pueblo gime. \footnote{\textbf{29:2}
  Prov 11,10} \bibleverse{3} Quien ama la sabiduría alegra a su padre;
pero un compañero de prostitutas despilfarra su riqueza. \footnote{\textbf{29:3}
  Luc 15,13} \bibleverse{4} El rey, mediante la justicia, hace que la
tierra sea estable, pero el que acepta sobornos lo derriba. \footnote{\textbf{29:4}
  Is 32,7} \bibleverse{5} El hombre que adula a su prójimoextiende una
red para sus pies. \bibleverse{6} El hombre malvado está atrapado por su
pecado, pero los justos pueden cantar y alegrarse. \bibleverse{7} Los
justos se preocupan por la justicia de los pobres. Los malvados no se
preocupan por el conocimiento. \bibleverse{8} Los burlones agitan una
ciudad, pero los hombres sabios apartan la ira. \bibleverse{9} Si un
hombre sabio va a la corte con un hombre necio, el tonto se enfurece o
se burla, y no hay paz. \footnote{\textbf{29:9} Mat 11,17}
\bibleverse{10} Los sanguinarios odian al hombre íntegro; y buscan la
vida de los rectos. \bibleverse{11} Un tonto descarga toda su ira, pero
un hombre sabio se controla a sí mismo. \footnote{\textbf{29:11} Prov
  25,28; Prov 12,23} \bibleverse{12} Si un gobernante escucha las
mentiras, todos sus funcionarios son malvados. \bibleverse{13} El pobre
y el opresor tienen esto en común: Yahvé da la vista a los ojos de
ambos. \bibleverse{14} El rey que juzga con justicia a los pobres, su
trono se establecerá para siempre. \footnote{\textbf{29:14} Prov 16,12}
\bibleverse{15} La vara de la corrección da sabiduría, pero un niño
abandonado a sí mismo causa vergüenza a su madre. \footnote{\textbf{29:15}
  Prov 29,17; Prov 22,15} \bibleverse{16} Cuando los malvados aumentan,
el pecado aumenta; pero los justos verán su caída. \footnote{\textbf{29:16}
  Sal 37,36} \bibleverse{17} Corrige a tu hijo, y él te dará la paz; sí,
traerá deleite a tu alma. \footnote{\textbf{29:17} Prov 23,13}
\bibleverse{18} Donde no hay revelación, el pueblo abandona la
contención; pero el que guarda la ley es bendecido. \bibleverse{19} Un
siervo no puede ser corregido con palabras. Aunque lo entiende, no
responde. \bibleverse{20} ¿Ves a un hombre que se precipita en sus
palabras? Hay más esperanza para un tonto que para él. \footnote{\textbf{29:20}
  Ecl 5,2-3; Sant 1,19} \bibleverse{21} El que mima a su siervo desde la
juventudhará que se convierta en un hijo al final. \bibleverse{22} Un
hombre enfadado suscita conflictos, y un hombre iracundo abunda en el
pecado. \footnote{\textbf{29:22} Prov 15,18; Prov 26,21} \bibleverse{23}
La soberbia del hombre lo abate, pero uno de espíritu humilde gana
honor. \footnote{\textbf{29:23} Mat 23,12; 1Pe 5,5} \bibleverse{24}
Quien es cómplice de un ladrón es enemigo de su propia alma. Presta
juramento, pero no se atreve a declarar. \footnote{\textbf{29:24} Lev
  5,1} \bibleverse{25} El miedo al hombre resulta ser una trampa, pero
quien pone su confianza en Yahvé está a salvo. \bibleverse{26} Muchos
buscan el favor del gobernante, pero la justicia del hombre viene de
Yahvé. \bibleverse{27} El hombre deshonesto detesta al justo, y los
rectos en sus caminos detestan a los malvados.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-57}{%
\section{29}\label{section-57}}

\bibleverse{1} He who is often rebuked and stiffens his neck will be
destroyed suddenly, with no remedy. \bibleverse{2} When the righteous
thrive, the people rejoice; but when the wicked rule, the people groan.
\bibleverse{3} Whoever loves wisdom brings joy to his father; but a
companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth. \bibleverse{4} The king
by justice makes the land stable, but he who takes bribes tears it down.
\bibleverse{5} A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his
feet. \bibleverse{6} An evil man is snared by his sin, but the righteous
can sing and be glad. \bibleverse{7} The righteous care about justice
for the poor. The wicked aren't concerned about knowledge.
\bibleverse{8} Mockers stir up a city, but wise men turn away anger.
\bibleverse{9} If a wise man goes to court with a foolish man, the fool
rages or scoffs, and there is no peace. \bibleverse{10} The bloodthirsty
hate a man of integrity; and they seek the life of the upright.
\bibleverse{11} A fool vents all of his anger, but a wise man brings
himself under control. \bibleverse{12} If a ruler listens to lies, all
of his officials are wicked. \bibleverse{13} The poor man and the
oppressor have this in common: Yahweh gives sight to the eyes of both.
\bibleverse{14} The king who fairly judges the poor, his throne shall be
established forever. \bibleverse{15} The rod of correction gives wisdom,
but a child left to himself causes shame to his mother. \bibleverse{16}
When the wicked increase, sin increases; but the righteous will see
their downfall. \bibleverse{17} Correct your son, and he will give you
peace; yes, he will bring delight to your soul. \bibleverse{18} Where
there is no revelation, the people cast off restraint; but one who keeps
the law is blessed. \bibleverse{19} A servant can't be corrected by
words. Though he understands, yet he will not respond. \bibleverse{20}
Do you see a man who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a
fool than for him. \bibleverse{21} He who pampers his servant from youth
will have him become a son in the end. \bibleverse{22} An angry man
stirs up strife, and a wrathful man abounds in sin. \bibleverse{23} A
man's pride brings him low, but one of lowly spirit gains honor.
\bibleverse{24} Whoever is an accomplice of a thief is an enemy of his
own soul. He takes an oath, but dares not testify. \bibleverse{25} The
fear of man proves to be a snare, but whoever puts his trust in Yahweh
is kept safe. \bibleverse{26} Many seek the ruler's favor, but a man's
justice comes from Yahweh. \bibleverse{27} A dishonest man detests the
righteous, and the upright in their ways detest the wicked.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{dichos-de-agur}{%
\subsection{Dichos de Agur}\label{dichos-de-agur}}

\hypertarget{section-58}{%
\section{30}\label{section-58}}

\bibleverse{1} Las palabras de Agur hijo de Jakeh, la revelación: dice
el hombre a Ithiel, a Ithiel y Ucal: \bibleverse{2} ``Seguramente soy el
hombre más ignorante, y no tienen la comprensión de un hombre.
\bibleverse{3} No he aprendido la sabiduría, ni tengo el conocimiento
del Santo. \bibleverse{4} ¿Quién subió al cielo y descendió? ¿Quién ha
recogido el viento en sus puños? ¿Quién ha atado las aguas en su manto?
¿Quién ha establecido todos los confines de la tierra? ¿Cómo se llama y
cómo se llama su hijo, si lo sabe? \footnote{\textbf{30:4} Job 38,1}
\bibleverse{5} ``Toda palabra de Dios es impecable. Es un escudo para
los que se refugian en él. \footnote{\textbf{30:5} Sal 12,6; Sal 18,30}
\bibleverse{6} No añadas nada a sus palabras, para que no te reprenda y
te encuentre mentiroso. \footnote{\textbf{30:6} Deut 4,2} \bibleverse{7}
``Dos cosas te he pedido. No me niegues antes de morir. \bibleverse{8}
Aleja de mí la falsedad y la mentira. No me des ni pobreza ni riqueza.
Aliméntame con el alimento que me es necesario, \footnote{\textbf{30:8}
  1Tim 6,6-8; Mat 6,11} \bibleverse{9} no sea que me llene, te niegue y
diga: ``¿Quién es Yahvé? o para que no sea pobre y robe, y así deshonrar
el nombre de mi Dios. \bibleverse{10} ``No calumnies al siervo ante su
amo, para que no te maldiga y seas considerado culpable. \bibleverse{11}
Hay una generación que maldice a su padre, y no bendice a su madre.
\bibleverse{12} Hay una generación que es pura a sus propios ojos, pero
no se han lavado de su suciedad. \footnote{\textbf{30:12} Prov 20,9}
\bibleverse{13} Hay una generación, ¡oh, qué elevados son sus ojos! Sus
párpados se levantan. \footnote{\textbf{30:13} Prov 21,4}
\bibleverse{14} Hay una generación cuyos dientes son como espadas, y sus
mandíbulas como cuchillos, para devorar a los pobres de la tierra, y a
los necesitados de entre los hombres. \bibleverse{15} ``La sanguijuela
tiene dos hijas:`Da, da'. ``Hay tres cosas que nunca se satisfacen;
cuatro que no dicen: ``¡Basta!'': \bibleverse{16} Sheol, el vientre
estéril, la tierra que no se conforma con el agua, y el fuego que no
dice: ``¡Basta! \bibleverse{17} ``El ojo que se burla de su padre, y
desprecia la obediencia a su madre, los cuervos del valle lo recogerán,
las águilas jóvenes lo comerán. \footnote{\textbf{30:17} Prov 20,20}
\bibleverse{18} ``Hay tres cosas que son demasiado sorprendentes para
mí, cuatro que no entiendo: \footnote{\textbf{30:18} Prov 6,16}
\bibleverse{19} El camino del águila en el aire, el camino de una
serpiente sobre una roca, el camino de un barco en medio del mar, y el
camino de un hombre con una doncella. \bibleverse{20} ``Así es el camino
de la mujer adúltera: Come y se limpia la boca, y dice: ``No he hecho
nada malo''. \bibleverse{21} ``Por tres cosas tiembla la tierra, y menos
de cuatro, no puede soportar: \bibleverse{22} Para un siervo cuando es
rey, un tonto cuando está lleno de comida, \footnote{\textbf{30:22} Ecl
  10,6} \bibleverse{23} para una mujer sin amor cuando está casada, y
una sirvienta que es heredera de su señora. \bibleverse{24} ``Hay cuatro
cosas que son pequeñas en la tierra, pero son sumamente sabios:
\bibleverse{25} Las hormigas no son un pueblo fuerte, sin embargo,
proporcionan su alimento en el verano. \footnote{\textbf{30:25} Prov
  6,6-8; Prov 10,5} \bibleverse{26} Los huracanes no son más que un
pueblo débil, pero hacen sus casas en las rocas. \bibleverse{27} Las
langostas no tienen rey, sin embargo, avanzan en las filas.
\bibleverse{28} Puedes atrapar una lagartija con las manos, sin embargo,
está en los palacios de los reyes. \bibleverse{29} ``Hay tres cosas que
son majestuosas en su marcha, cuatro que son majestuosos en su marcha:
\bibleverse{30} El león, que es el más poderoso de los animales, y no se
aparta por ninguna; \bibleverse{31} el galgo; el macho cabrío; y el rey
contra el que no hay que levantarse. \bibleverse{32} ``Si has hecho una
tontería al alzarte, o si has pensado mal, pon tu mano sobre tu boca.
\bibleverse{33} Pues como el batido de la leche produce mantequilla, y
el retorcimiento de la nariz produce sangre, por lo que el forzamiento
de la ira produce contienda''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{sayings-of-agur}{%
\subsection{Sayings of Agur}\label{sayings-of-agur}}

\hypertarget{section-59}{%
\section{30}\label{section-59}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the revelation: the
man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and Ucal: \bibleverse{2} ``Surely I am the
most ignorant man, and don't have a man's understanding. \bibleverse{3}
I have not learned wisdom, neither do I have the knowledge of the Holy
One. \bibleverse{4} Who has ascended up into heaven, and descended? Who
has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has bound the waters in his
garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his
name, and what is his son's name, if you know? \bibleverse{5} ``Every
word of God is flawless. He is a shield to those who take refuge in him.
\bibleverse{6} Don't you add to his words, lest he reprove you, and you
be found a liar. \bibleverse{7} ``Two things I have asked of you. Don't
deny me before I die. \bibleverse{8} Remove far from me falsehood and
lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with the food that is
needful for me, \bibleverse{9} lest I be full, deny you, and say, `Who
is Yahweh?' or lest I be poor, and steal, and so dishonor the name of my
God. \bibleverse{10} ``Don't slander a servant to his master, lest he
curse you, and you be held guilty. \bibleverse{11} There is a generation
that curses their father, and doesn't bless their mother.
\bibleverse{12} There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes,
yet are not washed from their filthiness. \bibleverse{13} There is a
generation, oh how lofty are their eyes! Their eyelids are lifted up.
\bibleverse{14} There is a generation whose teeth are like swords, and
their jaws like knives, to devour the poor from the earth, and the needy
from among men. \bibleverse{15} ``The leech has two daughters: `Give,
give.' ``There are three things that are never satisfied; four that
don't say, `Enough!': \bibleverse{16} Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{30:16}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} the barren womb, the earth that is
not satisfied with water, and the fire that doesn't say, `Enough!'
\bibleverse{17} ``The eye that mocks at his father, and scorns obedience
to his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, the young
eagles shall eat it. \bibleverse{18} ``There are three things which are
too amazing for me, four which I don't understand: \bibleverse{19} The
way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent on a rock, the way of a
ship in the middle of the sea, and the way of a man with a maiden.
\bibleverse{20} ``So is the way of an adulterous woman: She eats and
wipes her mouth, and says, `I have done nothing wrong.' \bibleverse{21}
``For three things the earth trembles, and under four, it can't bear up:
\bibleverse{22} For a servant when he is king, a fool when he is filled
with food, \bibleverse{23} for an unloved woman when she is married, and
a servant who is heir to her mistress. \bibleverse{24} ``There are four
things which are little on the earth, but they are exceedingly wise:
\bibleverse{25} The ants are not a strong people, yet they provide their
food in the summer. \bibleverse{26} The hyraxes are but a feeble folk,
yet make they their houses in the rocks. \bibleverse{27} The locusts
have no king, yet they advance in ranks. \bibleverse{28} You can catch a
lizard with your hands, yet it is in kings' palaces. \bibleverse{29}
``There are three things which are stately in their march, four which
are stately in going: \bibleverse{30} The lion, which is mightiest among
animals, and doesn't turn away for any; \bibleverse{31} the greyhound;
the male goat; and the king against whom there is no rising up.
\bibleverse{32} ``If you have done foolishly in lifting up yourself, or
if you have thought evil, put your hand over your mouth. \bibleverse{33}
For as the churning of milk produces butter, and the wringing of the
nose produces blood, so the forcing of wrath produces strife.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{dichos-para-lemuel}{%
\subsection{Dichos para Lemuel}\label{dichos-para-lemuel}}

\hypertarget{section-60}{%
\section{31}\label{section-60}}

\bibleverse{1} Las palabras del rey Lemuel: la revelación que le enseñó
su madre: \bibleverse{2} ``¡Oh, hijo mío! ¡Oh, hijo de mi vientre! ¡Oh,
hijo de mis votos! \bibleverse{3} No des tu fuerza a las mujeres, ni tus
caminos a lo que destruye a los reyes. \footnote{\textbf{31:3} Deut
  17,17; 1Re 11,1} \bibleverse{4} No es para reyes, Lemuel, no es para
los reyes beber vino, ni que los príncipes digan: ``¿Dónde está la
bebida fuerte? \footnote{\textbf{31:4} Prov 20,1} \bibleverse{5} para
que no beban y se olviden de la ley, y pervierten la justicia debida a
quien está afligido. \bibleverse{6} Da de beber fuerte al que está a
punto de perecer, y el vino a los amargados de alma. \bibleverse{7} Que
beba y se olvide de su pobreza, y no recordar más su miseria.
\bibleverse{8} Abre la boca para el mudo, en la causa de todos los que
quedan desolados. \footnote{\textbf{31:8} Job 29,12; Job 29,15}
\bibleverse{9} Abre tu boca, juzga con justicia, y servir de justicia a
los pobres y necesitados''.

\hypertarget{alabado-sea-el-ama-de-casa-capaz}{%
\subsection{Alabado sea el ama de casa
capaz}\label{alabado-sea-el-ama-de-casa-capaz}}

\bibleverse{10} \footnote{\textbf{31:10} Proverbios 31:10-31 forman un
  acróstico, en el que cada verso comienza con cada letra del alfabeto
  hebreo, en orden.} ¿Quién puede encontrar una mujer digna? Porque su
valor está muy por encima de los rubíes. \footnote{\textbf{31:10} Prov
  12,4; Prov 18,22} \bibleverse{11} El corazón de su marido confía en
ella. No le faltará ganancia. \bibleverse{12} Ella le hace el bien y no
el mal, todos los días de su vida. \bibleverse{13} Busca lana y lino, y
trabaja con entusiasmo con sus manos. \bibleverse{14} Es como los barcos
mercantes. Ella trae su pan desde lejos. \bibleverse{15} También se
levanta cuando todavía es de noche, da comida a su casa, y porciones
para sus sirvientas. \bibleverse{16} Considera un campo y lo compra. Con
el fruto de sus manos, planta un viñedo. \bibleverse{17} Ella arma su
cintura con fuerza, y hace que sus brazos sean fuertes. \bibleverse{18}
Ella percibe que su mercancía es rentable. Su lámpara no se apaga por la
noche. \bibleverse{19} Pone las manos en la rueca, y sus manos sostienen
el huso. \bibleverse{20} Ella abre sus brazos a los pobres; sí, extiende
sus manos a los necesitados. \bibleverse{21} No teme a la nieve por su
casa, porque toda su casa está vestida de escarlata. \bibleverse{22}
Hace para sí misma alfombras de tapiz. Su ropa es de lino fino y de
color púrpura. \bibleverse{23} Su marido es respetado en las puertas,
cuando se siente entre los ancianos de la tierra. \bibleverse{24} Ella
hace prendas de lino y las vende, y entrega las fajas al comerciante.
\footnote{\textbf{31:24} Hech 9,39} \bibleverse{25} La fuerza y la
dignidad son su vestimenta. Se ríe de la hora que viene. \footnote{\textbf{31:25}
  Job 5,22; Mat 6,34} \bibleverse{26} Ella abre su boca con sabiduría.
La instrucción amable está en su lengua. \bibleverse{27} Ella mira bien
los caminos de su casa, y no come el pan de la ociosidad.
\bibleverse{28} Sus hijos se levantan y la llaman bendita. Su marido
también la elogia: \bibleverse{29} ``Muchas mujeres hacen cosas nobles,
pero tú los superas a todos''. \bibleverse{30} El encanto es engañoso, y
la belleza es vana; pero la mujer que teme a Yahvé, será alabada.
\footnote{\textbf{31:30} Prov 11,22} \bibleverse{31} ¡Dale del fruto de
sus manos! ¡Que sus obras la alaben en las puertas! \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{sayings-for-lemuel}{%
\subsection{Sayings for Lemuel}\label{sayings-for-lemuel}}

\hypertarget{section-61}{%
\section{31}\label{section-61}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of King Lemuel---the revelation which his
mother taught him: \bibleverse{2} ``Oh, my son! Oh, son of my womb! Oh,
son of my vows! \bibleverse{3} Don't give your strength to women, nor
your ways to that which destroys kings. \bibleverse{4} It is not for
kings, Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes to
say, `Where is strong drink?' \bibleverse{5} lest they drink, and forget
the law, and pervert the justice due to anyone who is afflicted.
\bibleverse{6} Give strong drink to him who is ready to perish, and wine
to the bitter in soul. \bibleverse{7} Let him drink, and forget his
poverty, and remember his misery no more. \bibleverse{8} Open your mouth
for the mute, in the cause of all who are left desolate. \bibleverse{9}
Open your mouth, judge righteously, and serve justice to the poor and
needy.''

\hypertarget{praise-the-able-housewife}{%
\subsection{Praise the able housewife}\label{praise-the-able-housewife}}

\bibleverse{10} \footnote{\textbf{31:10} Proverbs 31:10-31 form an
  acrostic, with each verse starting with each letter of the Hebrew
  alphabet, in order.} Who can find a worthy woman? For her value is far
above rubies. \bibleverse{11} The heart of her husband trusts in her. He
shall have no lack of gain. \bibleverse{12} She does him good, and not
harm, all the days of her life. \bibleverse{13} She seeks wool and flax,
and works eagerly with her hands. \bibleverse{14} She is like the
merchant ships. She brings her bread from afar. \bibleverse{15} She
rises also while it is yet night, gives food to her household, and
portions for her servant girls. \bibleverse{16} She considers a field,
and buys it. With the fruit of her hands, she plants a vineyard.
\bibleverse{17} She arms her waist with strength, and makes her arms
strong. \bibleverse{18} She perceives that her merchandise is
profitable. Her lamp doesn't go out by night. \bibleverse{19} She lays
her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle.
\bibleverse{20} She opens her arms to the poor; yes, she extends her
hands to the needy. \bibleverse{21} She is not afraid of the snow for
her household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
\bibleverse{22} She makes for herself carpets of tapestry. Her clothing
is fine linen and purple. \bibleverse{23} Her husband is respected in
the gates, when he sits among the elders of the land. \bibleverse{24}
She makes linen garments and sells them, and delivers sashes to the
merchant. \bibleverse{25} Strength and dignity are her clothing. She
laughs at the time to come. \bibleverse{26} She opens her mouth with
wisdom. Kind instruction is on her tongue. \bibleverse{27} She looks
well to the ways of her household, and doesn't eat the bread of
idleness. \bibleverse{28} Her children rise up and call her blessed. Her
husband also praises her: \bibleverse{29} ``Many women do noble things,
but you excel them all.'' \bibleverse{30} Charm is deceitful, and beauty
is vain; but a woman who fears Yahweh, she shall be praised.
\bibleverse{31} Give her of the fruit of her hands! Let her works praise
her in the gates! \end{otherlanguage}
\end{paracol}
