\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{llamando-al-profeta}{%
\subsection{Llamando al profeta}\label{llamando-al-profeta}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabras de Jeremías, hijo de Hilcías, uno de los
sacerdotes que estaban en Anatot, en la tierra de Benjamín.
\bibleverse{2} La palabra de Yahvé\footnote{\textbf{1:2} ``Yahvé'' es el
  nombre propio de Dios, a veces traducido como ``\textsc{Señor}'' (en
  mayúsculas) en otras traducciones.} le llegó en los días de Josías
hijo de Amón, rey de Judá, en el año trece de su reinado. \footnote{\textbf{1:2}
  2Re 21,24} \bibleverse{3} También le llegó en los días de Joacim hijo
de Josías, rey de Judá, al final del undécimo año de Sedequías, hijo de
Josías, rey de Judá, para llevar cautiva a Jerusalén en el quinto mes.
\footnote{\textbf{1:3} 2Re 23,34; 2Re 24,17; 2Re 25,2; 2Re 25,8}

\hypertarget{el-llamado-y-la-ordenaciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-al-oficio-de-profetas}{%
\subsection{El llamado y la ordenación de Jeremías al oficio de
profetas}\label{el-llamado-y-la-ordenaciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-al-oficio-de-profetas}}

\bibleverse{4} La palabra de Yahvé vino a mí, diciendo, \bibleverse{5}
``Antes de formarte en el vientre, te conocía. Antes de que nacieras, te
he santificado. Te he nombrado profeta de las naciones''. \footnote{\textbf{1:5}
  Is 49,1; Gal 1,15}

\bibleverse{6} Entonces dije: ``¡Ah, Señor\footnote{\textbf{1:6} La
  palabra traducida ``Señor'' es ``Adonai''.} Yahvé! He aquí
que\footnote{\textbf{1:6} ``He aquí'', de ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', significa
  mirar, fijarse, observar, ver o contemplar. Se utiliza a menudo como
  interjección.} no sé hablar, pues soy un niño''. \footnote{\textbf{1:6}
  Éxod 3,11; Is 6,5-8}

\bibleverse{7} Pero Yahvé me dijo: ``No digas: `Soy un niño'; porque
debes ir a quien yo te envíe, y debes decir todo lo que yo te mande.
\bibleverse{8} No temas por ellos, porque yo estoy contigo para
rescatarte'', dice el Señor.

\bibleverse{9} Entonces el Señor extendió su mano y tocó mi boca. El
Señor me dijo: ``He aquí que he puesto mis palabras en tu boca.
\footnote{\textbf{1:9} Deut 18,18} \bibleverse{10} He aquí que hoy te he
puesto sobre las naciones y sobre los reinos, para arrancar y derribar,
para destruir y derribar, para edificar y plantar.'' \footnote{\textbf{1:10}
  Jer 18,7-10}

\hypertarget{dos-caras-que-llaman-el-uxe1rbol-de-vigilia-y-el-caldero-hirviendo}{%
\subsection{Dos caras que llaman (el árbol de vigilia y el caldero
hirviendo)}\label{dos-caras-que-llaman-el-uxe1rbol-de-vigilia-y-el-caldero-hirviendo}}

\bibleverse{11} Además, vino a mí la palabra de Yahvé, diciendo:
``Jeremías, ¿qué ves?'' Dije: ``Veo una rama de un almendro''.

\bibleverse{12} Entonces Yahvé me dijo: ``Has visto bien, porque yo
vigilo mi palabra para cumplirla''. \footnote{\textbf{1:12} Jer 31,28}

\bibleverse{13} La palabra de Yahvé vino a mí por segunda vez, diciendo:
``¿Qué ves?'' Dije: ``Veo un caldero hirviendo; y se está inclinando
hacia el norte''.

\bibleverse{14} Entonces Yahvé me dijo: ``Del norte se desatará el mal
sobre todos los habitantes de la tierra. \bibleverse{15} Porque he aquí
que llamaré a todas las familias de los reinos del norte --- dice el
Señor ---``Vendrán, y cada uno pondrá su trono a la entrada de las
puertas de Jerusalén, y contra todos sus muros alrededor, y contra todas
las ciudades de Judá. \bibleverse{16} Expresaré mis juicios contra ellos
sobre toda su maldad, en que me han abandonado, y han quemado incienso a
otros dioses, y adoraron las obras de sus propias manos.

\hypertarget{a-trabajar-y-a-la-oficina}{%
\subsection{¡A trabajar y a la
oficina!}\label{a-trabajar-y-a-la-oficina}}

\bibleverse{17} ``Ponte, pues, el cinturón en la cintura, levántate y
diles todo lo que te mando. No te asustes de ellos, no sea que yo te
desanime delante de ellos. \bibleverse{18} Porque he aquí que yo te he
hecho hoy una ciudad fortificada, una columna de hierro y muros de
bronce contra toda la tierra: contra los reyes de Judá, contra sus
príncipes, contra sus sacerdotes y contra el pueblo de la tierra.
\footnote{\textbf{1:18} Jer 15,20; Ezeq 3,8-9} \bibleverse{19} Lucharán
contra ti, pero no prevalecerán contra ti; porque yo estoy contigo ---
dice el Señor --- para rescatarte.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{calling-the-prophet}{%
\subsection{Calling the prophet}\label{calling-the-prophet}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, one of the
priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin. \bibleverse{2}
Yahweh's\footnote{\textbf{1:2} ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name,
  sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}'' (all caps) in other translations.}
word came to him in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah,
in the thirteenth year of his reign. \bibleverse{3} It came also in the
days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the end of the
eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the
carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month.

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-call-and-ordination-to-the-office-of-prophet}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's call and ordination to the office of
prophet}\label{jeremiahs-call-and-ordination-to-the-office-of-prophet}}

\bibleverse{4} Now Yahweh's word came to me, saying, \bibleverse{5}
``Before I formed you in the womb, I knew you. Before you were born, I
sanctified you. I have appointed you a prophet to the nations.''
\bibleverse{6} Then I said, ``Ah, Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:6} The word
  translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} Yahweh! Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:6}
  ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} I
don't know how to speak; for I am a child.'' \bibleverse{7} But Yahweh
said to me, ``Don't say, `I am a child;' for you must go to whomever I
send you, and you must say whatever I command you. \bibleverse{8} Don't
be afraid because of them, for I am with you to rescue you,'' says
Yahweh. \bibleverse{9} Then Yahweh stretched out his hand and touched my
mouth. Then Yahweh said to me, ``Behold, I have put my words in your
mouth. \bibleverse{10} Behold, I have today set you over the nations and
over the kingdoms, to uproot and to tear down, to destroy and to
overthrow, to build and to plant.''

\hypertarget{two-faces-that-call-the-waking-tree-and-the-boiling-cauldron}{%
\subsection{Two faces that call (the waking tree and the boiling
cauldron)}\label{two-faces-that-call-the-waking-tree-and-the-boiling-cauldron}}

\bibleverse{11} Moreover Yahweh's word came to me, saying, ``Jeremiah,
what do you see?'' I said, ``I see a branch of an almond tree.''
\bibleverse{12} Then Yahweh said to me, ``You have seen well; for I
watch over my word to perform it.'' \bibleverse{13} Yahweh's word came
to me the second time, saying, ``What do you see?'' I said, ``I see a
boiling cauldron; and it is tipping away from the north.''
\bibleverse{14} Then Yahweh said to me, ``Out of the north, evil will
break out on all the inhabitants of the land. \bibleverse{15} For
behold, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north,''
says Yahweh. ``They will come, and they will each set his throne at the
entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all its walls all
around, and against all the cities of Judah. \bibleverse{16} I will
utter my judgments against them concerning all their wickedness, in that
they have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods, and
worshiped the works of their own hands.

\hypertarget{to-work-and-to-the-office}{%
\subsection{To work and to the
office!}\label{to-work-and-to-the-office}}

\bibleverse{17} ``You therefore put your belt on your waist, arise, and
say to them all that I command you. Don't be dismayed at them, lest I
dismay you before them. \bibleverse{18} For behold, I have made you
today a fortified city, an iron pillar, and bronze walls against the
whole land---against the kings of Judah, against its princes, against
its priests, and against the people of the land. \bibleverse{19} They
will fight against you, but they will not prevail against you; for I am
with you'', says Yahweh, ``to rescue you.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-lealtad-inicial-de-israel-a-su-dios-y-su-posterior-apostasuxeda-desdeuxf1osa-con-sus-desastrosas-consecuencias}{%
\subsection{La lealtad inicial de Israel a su Dios y su posterior
apostasía desdeñosa con sus desastrosas
consecuencias}\label{la-lealtad-inicial-de-israel-a-su-dios-y-su-posterior-apostasuxeda-desdeuxf1osa-con-sus-desastrosas-consecuencias}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} La palabra de Yahvé vino a mí, diciendo: \bibleverse{2}
``Ve y proclama en los oídos de Jerusalén, diciendo: `Dice Yahvé,
``Recuerdo para ti la bondad de tu juventud, tu amor de novia, cómo
fuiste tras de mí en el desierto, en una tierra que no fue sembrada.
\bibleverse{3} Israel era la santidad para Yahvé, las primicias de su
cosecha. Todos los que lo devoren serán considerados culpables. El mal
vendrá sobre ellos'', dice Yahvé''.

\bibleverse{4} ¡Escuchen la palabra de Yahvé, casa de Jacob y todas las
familias de la casa de Israel! \bibleverse{5} Dice el Señor, ``Qué
injusticia han encontrado vuestros padres en mí, que se han alejado de
mí, y han caminado tras la vanidad sin valor, y se han quedado sin
valor? \footnote{\textbf{2:5} Miq 6,3-6} \bibleverse{6} No dijeron:
``¿Dónde está el Señor que nos sacó de la tierra de Egipto? que nos guió
por el desierto, a través de una tierra de desiertos y de fosas, a
través de una tierra de sequía y de sombra de muerte, a través de una
tierra por la que nadie pasaba, y donde no vivía ningún hombre''.
\bibleverse{7} Te traje a una tierra abundantepara comer sus frutos y
sus bondades; pero cuando entraste, profanaste mi tierra, y han hecho de
mi herencia una abominación. \bibleverse{8} Los sacerdotes no dijeron:
``¿Dónde está Yahvé? y los que manejan la ley no me conocían. Los
gobernantes también se han rebelado contra mí, y los profetas
profetizaron por Baaly seguía las cosas que no se aprovechan.
\bibleverse{9} ``Por lo tanto, aún contenderé con ustedes'', dice Yahvé,
``y contenderé con los hijos de tus hijos.

\hypertarget{el-comportamiento-de-israel-es-inaudito-y-sin-precedentes}{%
\subsection{El comportamiento de Israel es inaudito y sin
precedentes}\label{el-comportamiento-de-israel-es-inaudito-y-sin-precedentes}}

\bibleverse{10} Porque pasen a las islas de Kittim y vean. Envía a
Kedar, y considera con diligencia, y ver si ha habido tal cosa.
\bibleverse{11} ¿Ha cambiado una nación sus dioses, que realmente no son
dioses? Pero mi pueblo ha cambiado su gloria por lo que no aprovecha.
\footnote{\textbf{2:11} Rom 1,23} \bibleverse{12} ``Asombraos, cielos,
de estay tener un miedo atroz. Sé muy desolado'', dice Yahvé.
\bibleverse{13} ``Porque mi pueblo ha cometido dos males: me han
abandonado a mí, fuente de aguas vivas, y se recortan cisternas para sí
mismos: cisternas rotas que no pueden retener el agua. \footnote{\textbf{2:13}
  Jer 17,13; Sal 36,9}

\hypertarget{las-terribles-consecuencias-expiaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Las terribles consecuencias;
Expiación}\label{las-terribles-consecuencias-expiaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{14} ¿Es Israel un esclavo? ¿Ha nacido en la esclavitud? ¿Por
qué se ha convertido en un cautivo? \bibleverse{15} Los leones jóvenes
han rugido contra él y han alzado la voz. Han convertido su tierra en un
desierto. Sus ciudades están quemadas, sin habitantes. \bibleverse{16}
También los hijos de Menfis y de Tahpanhes han roto la corona de tu
cabeza. \footnote{\textbf{2:16} Jer 44,1} \bibleverse{17} ``¿No te lo
has buscado tú mismo? en que has abandonado a Yahvé tu Dios,\footnote{\textbf{2:17}
  La palabra hebrea traducida como ``Dios'' es ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}''
  (Elohim).} cuando te guiaba por el camino? \footnote{\textbf{2:17} Os
  13,9} \bibleverse{18} ¿Qué ganas con ir a Egipto a beber las aguas del
Shihor? ¿O por qué vas de camino a Asiria, a beber las aguas del río?
\footnote{\textbf{2:18} decir, el río Éufrates} \bibleverse{19} ``Tu
propia maldad te corregirá, y tu reincidencia te reprenderá. Sabed,
pues, y ved que es una cosa mala y amarga, que has abandonado a Yahvé,
tu Dios, y que mi temor no esté en ti'', dice el Señor, Yahvé de los
Ejércitos.

\hypertarget{el-servicio-pernicioso-de-baal-y-la-tendencia-desenfrenada-por-la-idolatruxeda}{%
\subsection{El servicio pernicioso de Baal y la tendencia desenfrenada
por la
idolatría}\label{el-servicio-pernicioso-de-baal-y-la-tendencia-desenfrenada-por-la-idolatruxeda}}

\bibleverse{20} ``Porque hace tiempo que rompí tu yugo, y reventar tus
ataduras. Dijiste: ``No voy a servir''. porque en cada colina alta y
bajo cada árbol verde te inclinaste, interpretando a la prostituta.
\footnote{\textbf{2:20} Jer 3,6; Is 57,5; Ezeq 6,13} \bibleverse{21} Sin
embargo, yo te había plantado una vid noble, una semilla pura y fiel.
¿Cómo es que os habéis convertido en las ramas degeneradas de una vid
extraña para mí? \footnote{\textbf{2:21} Is 5,1-4} \bibleverse{22}
Porque aunque te laves con lejíay usar mucho jabón, pero tu iniquidad
está marcada ante mí'', dice el Señor Yahvé. \bibleverse{23} ``¿Cómo
puedes decir: `No estoy contaminado'? ¿No he ido a por los Baals? Ve tu
camino en el valle. Saber lo que has hecho. Eres un dromedario veloz que
recorre sus caminos, \bibleverse{24} un asno salvaje acostumbrado al
desierto, que olfatea el viento en su ansia. Cuando está en celo, ¿quién
puede rechazarla? Todos los que la busquen no se cansarán. En su mes, la
encontrarán. \bibleverse{25} ``Evita que tus pies estén desnudos, y la
garganta de la sed. Pero tú dijiste: `Es en vano'. No, porque he amado a
extraños, y yo iré tras ellos'.

\hypertarget{la-idolatruxeda-indigna-y-la-apostasuxeda-incomprensible-la-mala-administraciuxf3n-de-justicia-y-el-mal-gobierno}{%
\subsection{La idolatría indigna y la apostasía incomprensible, la mala
administración de justicia y el mal
gobierno}\label{la-idolatruxeda-indigna-y-la-apostasuxeda-incomprensible-la-mala-administraciuxf3n-de-justicia-y-el-mal-gobierno}}

\bibleverse{26} Como el ladrón se avergüenza cuando es encontrado, para
que la casa de Israel se avergüence ---ellos, sus reyes, sus príncipes,
sus sacerdotes y sus profetas, \bibleverse{27} que le dicen a la madera:
``Tú eres mi padre''. y una piedra: ``Me has dado a luz''. porque me han
dado la espalda, y no su cara, pero en el momento de su angustia dirán:
``¡Levántate y sálvanos! \bibleverse{28} ``Pero, ¿dónde están vuestros
dioses que os habéis fabricado? Deja que se levanten, si pueden salvarte
en el momento de tu problema, porque tienes tantos dioses como ciudades,
oh Judá. \footnote{\textbf{2:28} Jue 10,14; Jer 11,13} \bibleverse{29}
``¿Por qué quieres pelear conmigo? Todos ustedes han transgredido contra
mí'', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{30} ``He golpeado a tus hijos en vano. No
recibieron ninguna corrección. Tu propia espada ha devorado a tus
profetas, como un león destructor. \footnote{\textbf{2:30} Is 1,5}
\bibleverse{31} Generación, considera la palabra de Yahvé. ¿He sido un
desierto para Israel? ¿O una tierra de espesa oscuridad? ¿Por qué mi
pueblo dice: `Nos hemos desprendido'? ¿No vendremos más a ti?
\bibleverse{32} ``¿Puede una virgen olvidar sus adornos, o una novia su
atuendo? Sin embargo, mi pueblo me ha olvidado durante días sin número.
\bibleverse{33} ¡Qué bien preparas tu camino para buscar el amor! Por
eso, incluso has enseñado a las mujeres malvadas tus caminos.
\bibleverse{34} También la sangre de las almas de los pobres inocentes
se encuentra en tus faldas. No los encontraste entrando, pero es por
todas estas cosas. \bibleverse{35} ``Sin embargo, dijiste: `Soy
inocente'. Seguramente su ira se ha alejado de mí'. ``He aquí que yo os
juzgaré, porque dices: ``No he pecado''. \footnote{\textbf{2:35} Is
  43,26} \bibleverse{36} ¿Por qué se empeñan en cambiar sus costumbres?
Tú también te avergonzarás de Egipto, como tú te avergonzaste de Asiria.
\bibleverse{37} También saldrás de ese lugar con las manos en la cabeza;
porque Yahvé ha rechazado a aquellos en quienes confías, y no
prosperarás con ellos.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{israels-initial-loyalty-to-their-god-and-their-subsequent-contemptuous-apostasy-with-its-disastrous-consequences}{%
\subsection{Israel's initial loyalty to their God and their subsequent
contemptuous apostasy with its disastrous
consequences}\label{israels-initial-loyalty-to-their-god-and-their-subsequent-contemptuous-apostasy-with-its-disastrous-consequences}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh's word came to me, saying, \bibleverse{2} ``Go and
proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, `Yahweh says, ``I remember
for you the kindness of your youth, your love as a bride, how you went
after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. \bibleverse{3}
Israel was holiness to Yahweh, the first fruits of his increase. All who
devour him will be held guilty. Evil will come on them,''\,' says
Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{4} Hear Yahweh's word, O house of Jacob, and all
the families of the house of Israel! \bibleverse{5} Yahweh says, ``What
unrighteousness have your fathers found in me, that they have gone far
from me, and have walked after worthless vanity, and have become
worthless? \bibleverse{6} They didn't say, `Where is Yahweh who brought
us up out of the land of Egypt, who led us through the wilderness,
through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought and of
the shadow of death, through a land that no one passed through, and
where no man lived?' \bibleverse{7} I brought you into a plentiful land
to eat its fruit and its goodness; but when you entered, you defiled my
land, and made my heritage an abomination. \bibleverse{8} The priests
didn't say, `Where is Yahweh?' and those who handle the law didn't know
me. The rulers also transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied
by Baal and followed things that do not profit. \bibleverse{9}
``Therefore I will yet contend with you,'' says Yahweh, ``and I will
contend with your children's children.

\hypertarget{israels-behavior-is-unheard-of-and-unprecedented}{%
\subsection{Israel's behavior is unheard of and
unprecedented}\label{israels-behavior-is-unheard-of-and-unprecedented}}

\bibleverse{10} For pass over to the islands of Kittim, and see. Send to
Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there has been such a thing.
\bibleverse{11} Has a nation changed its gods, which really are no gods?
But my people have changed their glory for that which doesn't profit.
\bibleverse{12} ``Be astonished, you heavens, at this and be horribly
afraid. Be very desolate,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{13} ``For my people
have committed two evils: they have forsaken me, the spring of living
waters, and cut out cisterns for themselves: broken cisterns that can't
hold water.

\hypertarget{the-terrible-consequences-atonement}{%
\subsection{The terrible consequences;
Atonement}\label{the-terrible-consequences-atonement}}

\bibleverse{14} Is Israel a slave? Is he born into slavery? Why has he
become a captive? \bibleverse{15} The young lions have roared at him and
raised their voices. They have made his land waste. His cities are
burned up, without inhabitant. \bibleverse{16} The children also of
Memphis and Tahpanhes have broken the crown of your head.
\bibleverse{17} ``Haven't you brought this on yourself, in that you have
forsaken Yahweh your God,\footnote{\textbf{2:17} The Hebrew word
  rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} when he led you by
the way? \bibleverse{18} Now what do you gain by going to Egypt, to
drink the waters of the Shihor? Or why do you to go on the way to
Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?\footnote{\textbf{2:18} i. e.,
  the Euphrates River} \bibleverse{19} ``Your own wickedness will
correct you, and your backsliding will rebuke you. Know therefore and
see that it is an evil and bitter thing, that you have forsaken Yahweh
your God, and that my fear is not in you,'' says the Lord, Yahweh of
Armies.

\hypertarget{the-pernicious-service-of-baal-and-the-rampant-tendency-for-idolatry}{%
\subsection{The Pernicious Service of Baal and the Rampant Tendency for
Idolatry}\label{the-pernicious-service-of-baal-and-the-rampant-tendency-for-idolatry}}

\bibleverse{20} ``For long ago I broke off your yoke, and burst your
bonds. You said, `I will not serve;' for on every high hill and under
every green tree you bowed yourself, playing the prostitute.
\bibleverse{21} Yet I had planted you a noble vine, a pure and faithful
seed. How then have you turned into the degenerate branches of a foreign
vine to me? \bibleverse{22} For though you wash yourself with lye, and
use much soap, yet your iniquity is marked before me,'' says the Lord
Yahweh. \bibleverse{23} ``How can you say, `I am not defiled. I have not
gone after the Baals'? See your way in the valley. Know what you have
done. You are a swift dromedary traversing her ways, \bibleverse{24} a
wild donkey used to the wilderness, that sniffs the wind in her craving.
When she is in heat, who can turn her away? All those who seek her will
not weary themselves. In her month, they will find her. \bibleverse{25}
``Keep your feet from being bare, and your throat from thirst. But you
said, `It is in vain. No, for I have loved strangers, and I will go
after them.'

\hypertarget{unworthy-idolatry-and-incomprehensible-apostasy-mismanagement-of-justice-and-bad-government}{%
\subsection{Unworthy idolatry and incomprehensible apostasy,
mismanagement of justice and bad
government}\label{unworthy-idolatry-and-incomprehensible-apostasy-mismanagement-of-justice-and-bad-government}}

\bibleverse{26} As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so the house
of Israel is ashamed--- they, their kings, their princes, their priests,
and their prophets, \bibleverse{27} who tell wood, `You are my father,'
and a stone, `You have given birth to me,' for they have turned their
back to me, and not their face, but in the time of their trouble they
will say, `Arise, and save us!' \bibleverse{28} ``But where are your
gods that you have made for yourselves? Let them arise, if they can save
you in the time of your trouble, for you have as many gods as you have
towns, O Judah. \bibleverse{29} ``Why will you contend with me? You all
have transgressed against me,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{30} ``I have
struck your children in vain. They received no correction. Your own
sword has devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion.
\bibleverse{31} Generation, consider Yahweh's word. Have I been a
wilderness to Israel? Or a land of thick darkness? Why do my people say,
`We have broken loose. We will come to you no more'? \bibleverse{32}
``Can a virgin forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my
people have forgotten me for days without number. \bibleverse{33} How
well you prepare your way to seek love! Therefore you have even taught
the wicked women your ways. \bibleverse{34} Also the blood of the souls
of the innocent poor is found in your skirts. You didn't find them
breaking in, but it is because of all these things. \bibleverse{35}
``Yet you said, `I am innocent. Surely his anger has turned away from
me.' ``Behold, I will judge you, because you say, `I have not sinned.'
\bibleverse{36} Why do you go about so much to change your ways? You
will be ashamed of Egypt also, as you were ashamed of Assyria.
\bibleverse{37} You will also leave that place with your hands on your
head; for Yahweh has rejected those in whom you trust, and you won't
prosper with them.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{es-posible-aceptar-a-las-personas-que-han-sido-violadas-por-la-idolatruxeda}{%
\subsection{¿Es posible aceptar a las personas que han sido violadas por
la
idolatría?}\label{es-posible-aceptar-a-las-personas-que-han-sido-violadas-por-la-idolatruxeda}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Dicen: ``Si un hombre abandona a su mujer, y ella se
aleja de él y pasa a ser de otro hombre, ¿debe volver a ella? ¿No
estaría esa tierra muy contaminada? Pero tú has jugado a la prostitución
con muchos amantes; sin embargo, vuelve otra vez a mí'', dice el Señor.
\footnote{\textbf{3:1} Deut 24,1-4}

\bibleverse{2} ``¡Levanta tus ojos a las alturas desnudas y mira! ¿Dónde
no te has acostado? Te has sentado a esperarlos junto al camino, como un
árabe en el desierto. Has contaminado la tierra con tu prostitución y
con tu maldad. \bibleverse{3} Por eso las lluvias han sido retenidas y
no ha habido lluvia tardía; sin embargo, has tenido una frente de
prostituta y no quisiste avergonzarte. \bibleverse{4} ¿No me gritarás
desde ahora: `Padre mío, tú eres el guía de mi juventud'?

\bibleverse{5} ``\,`¿Conservará su ira para siempre? ¿Lo mantendrá hasta
el final?' He aquí que tú has hablado y has hecho cosas malas, y te has
salido con la tuya''.

\hypertarget{israel-y-juduxe1-como-hermanas-renegadas-recordatorio-para-arrepentirse-y-regresar-a-casa}{%
\subsection{Israel y Judá como hermanas renegadas; Recordatorio para
arrepentirse y regresar a
casa}\label{israel-y-juduxe1-como-hermanas-renegadas-recordatorio-para-arrepentirse-y-regresar-a-casa}}

\bibleverse{6} Además, el Señor me dijo en los días del rey Josías:
``¿Has visto lo que ha hecho el rebelde Israel? Se ha subido a todo
monte alto y a todo árbol verde, y se ha prostituido allí. \footnote{\textbf{3:6}
  Jer 2,20} \bibleverse{7} Después de haber hecho todas estas cosas,
dije: `Volverá a mí'; pero no volvió, y su hermana traidora, Judá, lo
vio. \bibleverse{8} Vi que cuando, por esta misma causa, la rebelde
Israel había cometido adulterio, yo la había repudiado y le había dado
un certificado de divorcio, pero la traicionera Judá, su hermana, no
tuvo miedo, sino que también fue y se hizo la prostituta. \footnote{\textbf{3:8}
  2Re 17,18-19; Ezeq 23,2-11} \bibleverse{9} Por haber tomado a la
ligera su prostitución, la tierra fue contaminada, y ella cometió
adulterio con piedras y con madera. \bibleverse{10} Pero por todo esto
su hermana traidora, Judá, no ha vuelto a mí con todo su corazón, sino
sólo en apariencia'', dice el Señor.

\bibleverse{11} El Señor me dijo: ``El Israel renegado se ha mostrado
más justo que el Judá traidor. \bibleverse{12} Ve y proclama estas
palabras hacia el norte, y di: ``Vuelve, Israel reincidente'', dice el
Señor; ``No miraré con ira hacia ti, porque soy misericordioso'', dice
el Señor. No me enojaré para siempre. \footnote{\textbf{3:12} Sal
  103,8-9} \bibleverse{13} Sólo reconoce tu iniquidad, que te has
rebelado contra el Señor, tu Dios, y has esparcido tus caminos a los
extraños debajo de todo árbol verde, y no has obedecido mi voz'', dice
el Señor.

\hypertarget{llama-al-arrepentimiento-palabra-de-salvaciuxf3n-sobre-jerusaluxe9n-y-juduxe1}{%
\subsection{Llama al arrepentimiento; Palabra de salvación sobre
Jerusalén y
Judá}\label{llama-al-arrepentimiento-palabra-de-salvaciuxf3n-sobre-jerusaluxe9n-y-juduxe1}}

\bibleverse{14} ``Volved, hijos descarriados --- dice Yahvé ---, porque
yo soy un esposo para vosotros. Tomaré a uno de ustedes de una ciudad, y
a dos de una familia, y los llevaré a Sión. \footnote{\textbf{3:14} Os
  2,19; Is 6,13} \bibleverse{15} Os daré pastores según mi corazón, que
os alimentarán con conocimiento y comprensión. \footnote{\textbf{3:15}
  Jer 23,4} \bibleverse{16} Sucederá que cuando os multipliquéis y
crezcáis en la tierra en aquellos días --- dice el Señor --- ya no
dirán: ``¡El arca de la alianza de Yahvé! No les vendrá a la mente. No
la recordarán. No la echarán de menos, ni se hará otra. \bibleverse{17}
En aquel tiempo llamarán a Jerusalén `Trono de Yahvé'; y todas las
naciones se reunirán en ella, en el nombre de Yahvé, en Jerusalén. Ya no
caminarán según la terquedad de su malvado corazón. \footnote{\textbf{3:17}
  Is 2,2-4; Is 65,2} \bibleverse{18} En esos días la casa de Judá
caminará con la casa de Israel, y vendrán juntos desde la tierra del
norte a la tierra que di en herencia a vuestros padres. \footnote{\textbf{3:18}
  Is 11,11-13}

\hypertarget{nostuxe1lgica-mirada-atruxe1s-a-la-infidelidad-de-la-gente}{%
\subsection{Nostálgica mirada atrás a la infidelidad de la
gente}\label{nostuxe1lgica-mirada-atruxe1s-a-la-infidelidad-de-la-gente}}

\bibleverse{19} ``Pero yo dije: `¡Cómo quiero ponerte entre los niños y
darte una tierra agradable, una buena herencia de los ejércitos de las
naciones! \footnote{\textbf{3:19} Jer 3,4}

\bibleverse{20} ``Ciertamente, como la esposa se aparta a traición de su
marido, así me habéis tratado a traición, casa de Israel'', dice el
Señor.

\hypertarget{canciuxf3n-de-arrepentimiento-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Canción de arrepentimiento del
pueblo}\label{canciuxf3n-de-arrepentimiento-del-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{21} Se oye una voz en las alturas, el llanto y las súplicas
de los hijos de Israel; porque han pervertido su camino, se han olvidado
de Yavé, su Dios. \bibleverse{22} Volved, hijos descarriados, y yo
sanaré vuestro descarrío. ``He aquí que hemos acudido a ti, porque tú
eres Yahvé, nuestro Dios. \footnote{\textbf{3:22} Os 6,1}
\bibleverse{23} En verdad, el auxilio de las colinas, el alboroto de los
montes, es vano. En verdad la salvación de Israel está en Yahvé nuestro
Dios. \bibleverse{24} Pero la cosa vergonzosa ha devorado el trabajo de
nuestros padres desde nuestra juventud, sus rebaños y sus manadas, sus
hijos y sus hijas. \bibleverse{25} Acostémonos en nuestra vergüenza, y
que nuestra confusión nos cubra; porque hemos pecado contra Yahvé
nuestro Dios, nosotros y nuestros padres, desde nuestra juventud hasta
hoy. No hemos obedecido la voz de Yahvé nuestro Dios''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{is-it-possible-to-accept-people-who-have-been-raped-by-idolatry}{%
\subsection{Is it possible to accept people who have been raped by
idolatry?}\label{is-it-possible-to-accept-people-who-have-been-raped-by-idolatry}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} ``They say, `If a man puts away his wife, and she goes
from him, and becomes another man's, should he return to her again?'
Wouldn't that land be greatly polluted? But you have played the
prostitute with many lovers; yet return again to me,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{2} ``Lift up your eyes to the bare heights, and see! Where
have you not been lain with? You have sat waiting for them by the road,
as an Arabian in the wilderness. You have polluted the land with your
prostitution and with your wickedness. \bibleverse{3} Therefore the
showers have been withheld and there has been no latter rain; yet you
have had a prostitute's forehead and you refused to be ashamed.
\bibleverse{4} Will you not from this time cry to me, `My Father, you
are the guide of my youth!'? \bibleverse{5} ``\,`Will he retain his
anger forever? Will he keep it to the end?' Behold, you have spoken and
have done evil things, and have had your way.''

\hypertarget{israel-and-judah-as-renegade-sisters-reminder-to-repent-and-return-home}{%
\subsection{Israel and Judah as renegade sisters; Reminder to repent and
return
home}\label{israel-and-judah-as-renegade-sisters-reminder-to-repent-and-return-home}}

\bibleverse{6} Moreover, Yahweh said to me in the days of Josiah the
king, ``Have you seen that which backsliding Israel has done? She has
gone up on every high mountain and under every green tree, and has
played the prostitute there. \bibleverse{7} I said after she had done
all these things, `She will return to me;' but she didn't return, and
her treacherous sister Judah saw it. \bibleverse{8} I saw when, for this
very cause, that backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put
her away and given her a certificate of divorce, yet treacherous Judah,
her sister, had no fear, but she also went and played the prostitute.
\bibleverse{9} Because she took her prostitution lightly, the land was
polluted, and she committed adultery with stones and with wood.
\bibleverse{10} Yet for all this her treacherous sister, Judah, has not
returned to me with her whole heart, but only in pretense,'' says
Yahweh. \bibleverse{11} Yahweh said to me, ``Backsliding Israel has
shown herself more righteous than treacherous Judah. \bibleverse{12} Go,
and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, `Return, you
backsliding Israel,' says Yahweh; `I will not look in anger on you, for
I am merciful,' says Yahweh. `I will not keep anger forever.
\bibleverse{13} Only acknowledge your iniquity, that you have
transgressed against Yahweh your God, and have scattered your ways to
the strangers under every green tree, and you have not obeyed my
voice,'\,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{call-to-repentance-word-of-salvation-on-jerusalem-and-judah}{%
\subsection{Call to repentance; Word of salvation on Jerusalem and
Judah}\label{call-to-repentance-word-of-salvation-on-jerusalem-and-judah}}

\bibleverse{14} ``Return, backsliding children,'' says Yahweh, ``for I
am a husband to you. I will take one of you from a city, and two from a
family, and I will bring you to Zion. \bibleverse{15} I will give you
shepherds according to my heart, who will feed you with knowledge and
understanding. \bibleverse{16} It will come to pass, when you are
multiplied and increased in the land in those days,'' says Yahweh,
``they will no longer say, `the ark of Yahweh's covenant!' It will not
come to mind. They won't remember it. They won't miss it, nor will
another be made. \bibleverse{17} At that time they will call Jerusalem
`Yahweh's Throne;' and all the nations will be gathered to it, to
Yahweh's name, to Jerusalem. They will no longer walk after the
stubbornness of their evil heart. \bibleverse{18} In those days the
house of Judah will walk with the house of Israel, and they will come
together out of the land of the north to the land that I gave for an
inheritance to your fathers.

\hypertarget{nostalgic-look-back-at-peoples-infidelity}{%
\subsection{Nostalgic look back at people's
infidelity}\label{nostalgic-look-back-at-peoples-infidelity}}

\bibleverse{19} ``But I said, `How I desire to put you among the
children, and give you a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the armies
of the nations!' and I said, `You shall call me ``My Father'', and shall
not turn away from following me.' \bibleverse{20} ``Surely as a wife
treacherously departs from her husband, so you have dealt treacherously
with me, house of Israel,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{peoples-song-of-repentance}{%
\subsection{People's Song of
Repentance}\label{peoples-song-of-repentance}}

\bibleverse{21} A voice is heard on the bare heights, the weeping and
the petitions of the children of Israel; because they have perverted
their way, they have forgotten Yahweh their God. \bibleverse{22} Return,
you backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding. ``Behold, we
have come to you; for you are Yahweh our God. \bibleverse{23} Truly help
from the hills, the tumult on the mountains, is in vain. Truly the
salvation of Israel is in Yahweh our God. \bibleverse{24} But the
shameful thing has devoured the labor of our fathers from our youth,
their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.
\bibleverse{25} Let us lie down in our shame, and let our confusion
cover us; for we have sinned against Yahweh our God, we and our fathers,
from our youth even to this day. We have not obeyed Yahweh our God's
voice.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{promesa-de-aceptaciuxf3n-despuuxe9s-de-un-arrepentimiento-sincero}{%
\subsection{Promesa de aceptación después de un arrepentimiento
sincero}\label{promesa-de-aceptaciuxf3n-despuuxe9s-de-un-arrepentimiento-sincero}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Si te vuelves, Israel --- dice Yahvé ---, si te vuelves
a mí y si quitas tus abominaciones de mi vista, entonces no serás
removido; \bibleverse{2} y jurarás: ``Vive Yahvé'', en verdad, en
justicia y en rectitud. Las naciones se bendecirán en él, y se gloriarán
en él''. \footnote{\textbf{4:2} Jer 12,16; Is 65,16}

\bibleverse{3} Porque Yahvé dice a los hombres de Judá y a Jerusalén:
``Romped vuestro barbecho y no sembréis entre espinos. \footnote{\textbf{4:3}
  Os 10,12} \bibleverse{4} Circuncidaos a Yahvé, y quitad los prepucios
de vuestro corazón, hombres de Judá y habitantes de Jerusalén; no sea
que mi ira salga como un fuego, y arda de modo que nadie pueda apagarla,
a causa de la maldad de vuestras acciones. \footnote{\textbf{4:4} Jer
  9,26; Deut 10,16}

\hypertarget{guerra-la-apariciuxf3n-del-terrible-enemigo-del-norte}{%
\subsection{¡Guerra! La aparición del terrible enemigo del
norte}\label{guerra-la-apariciuxf3n-del-terrible-enemigo-del-norte}}

\bibleverse{5} Proclamad en Judá y publicad en Jerusalén, y decid:
`¡Tocad la trompeta en la tierra! Griten en voz alta y digan:
`¡Reúnanse! Vayamos a las ciudades fortificadas'. \bibleverse{6}
Levanten un estandarte hacia Sión. ¡Huid para poneros a salvo! No
esperen, porque traeré el mal del norte y una gran destrucción''.
\footnote{\textbf{4:6} Jer 1,14}

\bibleverse{7} Un león ha subido de su espesura, y un destructor de
naciones. Está en camino. Ha salido de su lugar, para hacer que tu
tierra quede desolada, que tus ciudades queden asoladas, sin habitantes.
\bibleverse{8} Por eso, vístete de tela de saco, lamenta y llora, porque
el furor de Yahvé no se ha apartado de nosotros. \bibleverse{9}
``Sucederá en ese día --- dice Yavé --- que el corazón del rey perecerá,
junto con el corazón de los príncipes. Los sacerdotes se asombrarán y
los profetas se maravillarán''.

\bibleverse{10} Entonces dije: ``¡Ah, Señor Yahvé! Ciertamente has
engañado mucho a este pueblo y a Jerusalén, diciendo: `Tendréis paz';
mientras que la espada llega hasta el corazón.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:10}
  Jer 6,14}

\bibleverse{11} En aquel tiempo se dirá a este pueblo y a Jerusalén:
``Un viento caliente sopla desde las alturas desnudas del desierto hacia
la hija de mi pueblo, no para aventar ni para limpiar. \bibleverse{12}
Un viento pleno de estos vendrá para mí. Ahora también pronunciaré
juicios contra ellos''.

\bibleverse{13} He aquí que subirá como las nubes, y sus carros serán
como el torbellino. Sus caballos son más veloces que las águilas. ¡Ay de
nosotros! Porque estamos arruinados. \bibleverse{14} Jerusalén, lava tu
corazón de la maldad, para que te salves. ¿Hasta cuándo se alojarán en
ti tus malos pensamientos? \footnote{\textbf{4:14} Is 1,16}
\bibleverse{15} Porque una voz declara desde Dan, y publica el mal desde
las colinas de Efraín: \bibleverse{16} ``Decid a las naciones, he aquí
que publican contra Jerusalén: `Vienen vigilantes de un país lejano, y
levantan su voz contra las ciudades de Judá. \bibleverse{17} Como
guardianes de un campo, están contra ella por todas partes, porque se ha
rebelado contra mí', dice el Señor. \footnote{\textbf{4:17} Jer 1,15;
  Jer 6,3} \bibleverse{18} ``Tu camino y tus acciones te han traído
estas cosas. Esta es tu maldad, pues es amarga, porque llega hasta tu
corazón.''

\bibleverse{19} ¡Mi angustia, mi angustia! ¡Me duele hasta el corazón!
Mi corazón tiembla dentro de mí. No puedo callar, porque has oído, oh
alma mía, el sonido de la trompeta, la alarma de la guerra. \footnote{\textbf{4:19}
  Is 16,9} \bibleverse{20} Destrucción sobre destrucción está decretada,
pues toda la tierra está asolada. De pronto mis tiendas son destruidas,
y mis cortinas desaparecen en un momento. \bibleverse{21} ¿Hasta cuándo
veré el estandarte y oiré el sonido de la trompeta?

\bibleverse{22} ``Porque mi pueblo es necio. No me conocen. Son niños
insensatos y no tienen entendimiento. Son hábiles para hacer el mal,
pero no saben hacer el bien''. \bibleverse{23} Vi la tierra, y he aquí
que estaba desierta y vacía, y los cielos, y no tenían luz.
\bibleverse{24} Vi las montañas, y he aquí que temblaban, y todas las
colinas se movían de un lado a otro. \bibleverse{25} Vi, y he aquí que
no había hombre, y todas las aves del cielo habían huido.
\bibleverse{26} Vi, y he aquí que el campo fructífero era un desierto, y
todas sus ciudades fueron derribadas ante la presencia de Yahvé, ante su
feroz ira. \bibleverse{27} Porque Yahvé dice: ``Toda la tierra será una
desolación; sin embargo, no haré un final completo. \footnote{\textbf{4:27}
  Jer 5,10; Jer 5,18} \bibleverse{28} Por esto la tierra se enlutará, y
los cielos de arriba se ennegrecerán, porque yo lo he dicho. Lo he
planeado, y no me he arrepentido, ni me volveré atrás''.

\bibleverse{29} Todas las ciudades huyen por el ruido de los jinetes y
los arqueros. Se meten en los matorrales y se suben a las rocas. Toda
ciudad está abandonada, y no hay un solo hombre que habite en ella.
\bibleverse{30} Tú, cuando seas desolada, ¿qué harás? Aunque te vistas
de escarlata, aunque te adornes con ornamentos de oro, aunque agrandes
tus ojos con maquillaje, te embelleces en vano. Tus amantes te
desprecian. Buscan tu vida. \bibleverse{31} Porque he oído una voz como
la de una mujer de parto, la angustia de la que da a luz a su primer
hijo, la voz de la hija de Sión, que jadea, que extiende sus manos,
diciendo: ``¡Ay de mí ahora! Porque mi alma se desmaya ante los
asesinos''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{promise-of-acceptance-after-sincere-repentance}{%
\subsection{Promise of acceptance after sincere
repentance}\label{promise-of-acceptance-after-sincere-repentance}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} ``If you will return, Israel,'' says Yahweh, ``if you
will return to me, and if you will put away your abominations out of my
sight; then you will not be removed; \bibleverse{2} and you will swear,
`As Yahweh lives,' in truth, in justice, and in righteousness. The
nations will bless themselves in him, and they will glory in him.''
\bibleverse{3} For Yahweh says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem,
``Break up your fallow ground, and don't sow among thorns.
\bibleverse{4} Circumcise yourselves to Yahweh, and take away the
foreskins of your heart, you men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem;
lest my wrath go out like fire, and burn so that no one can quench it,
because of the evil of your doings.

\hypertarget{war-the-appearance-of-the-terrible-enemy-of-the-north}{%
\subsection{War! The appearance of the terrible enemy of the
north}\label{war-the-appearance-of-the-terrible-enemy-of-the-north}}

\bibleverse{5} Declare in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say,
`Blow the trumpet in the land!' Cry aloud and say, `Assemble yourselves!
Let's go into the fortified cities!' \bibleverse{6} Set up a standard
toward Zion. Flee for safety! Don't wait; for I will bring evil from the
north, and a great destruction.'' \bibleverse{7} A lion has gone up from
his thicket, and a destroyer of nations. He is on his way. He has gone
out from his place, to make your land desolate, that your cities be laid
waste, without inhabitant. \bibleverse{8} For this, clothe yourself with
sackcloth, lament and wail; for the fierce anger of Yahweh hasn't turned
back from us. \bibleverse{9} ``It will happen at that day,'' says
Yahweh, ``that the heart of the king will perish, along with the heart
of the princes. The priests will be astonished, and the prophets will
wonder.'' \bibleverse{10} Then I said, ``Ah, Lord Yahweh! Surely you
have greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, `You will have
peace;' whereas the sword reaches to the heart.'' \bibleverse{11} At
that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem, ``A hot wind
blows from the bare heights in the wilderness toward the daughter of my
people, not to winnow, nor to cleanse. \bibleverse{12} A full wind from
these will come for me. Now I will also utter judgments against them.''
\bibleverse{13} Behold, he will come up as clouds, and his chariots will
be as the whirlwind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us! For
we are ruined. \bibleverse{14} Jerusalem, wash your heart from
wickedness, that you may be saved. How long will your evil thoughts
lodge within you? \bibleverse{15} For a voice declares from Dan, and
publishes evil from the hills of Ephraim: \bibleverse{16} ``Tell the
nations, behold, publish against Jerusalem, `Watchers come from a far
country, and raise their voice against the cities of Judah.
\bibleverse{17} As keepers of a field, they are against her all around,
because she has been rebellious against me,'\,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{18} ``Your way and your doings have brought these things to
you. This is your wickedness, for it is bitter, for it reaches to your
heart.'' \bibleverse{19} My anguish, my anguish! I am pained at my very
heart! My heart trembles within me. I can't hold my peace, because you
have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.
\bibleverse{20} Destruction on destruction is decreed, for the whole
land is laid waste. Suddenly my tents are destroyed, and my curtains
gone in a moment. \bibleverse{21} How long will I see the standard and
hear the sound of the trumpet? \bibleverse{22} ``For my people are
foolish. They don't know me. They are foolish children, and they have no
understanding. They are skillful in doing evil, but they don't know how
to do good.'' \bibleverse{23} I saw the earth and, behold, it was waste
and void, and the heavens, and they had no light. \bibleverse{24} I saw
the mountains, and behold, they trembled, and all the hills moved back
and forth. \bibleverse{25} I saw, and behold, there was no man, and all
the birds of the sky had fled. \bibleverse{26} I saw, and behold, the
fruitful field was a wilderness, and all its cities were broken down at
the presence of Yahweh, before his fierce anger. \bibleverse{27} For
Yahweh says, ``The whole land will be a desolation; yet I will not make
a full end. \bibleverse{28} For this the earth will mourn, and the
heavens above be black, because I have spoken it. I have planned it, and
I have not repented, neither will I turn back from it.'' \bibleverse{29}
Every city flees for the noise of the horsemen and archers. They go into
the thickets and climb up on the rocks. Every city is forsaken, and not
a man dwells therein. \bibleverse{30} You, when you are made desolate,
what will you do? Though you clothe yourself with scarlet, though you
deck yourself with ornaments of gold, though you enlarge your eyes with
makeup, you make yourself beautiful in vain. Your lovers despise you.
They seek your life. \bibleverse{31} For I have heard a voice as of a
woman in travail, the anguish as of her who gives birth to her first
child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, who gasps for breath, who
spreads her hands, saying, ``Woe is me now! For my soul faints before
the murderers.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-terrible-corrupciuxf3n-de-todo-el-pueblo-de-jerusaluxe9n-obliga-al-seuxf1or-a-ejecutar-sin-piedad-el-castigo-del-terrible-enemigo}{%
\subsection{La terrible corrupción de todo el pueblo de Jerusalén obliga
al Señor a ejecutar sin piedad el castigo del terrible
enemigo}\label{la-terrible-corrupciuxf3n-de-todo-el-pueblo-de-jerusaluxe9n-obliga-al-seuxf1or-a-ejecutar-sin-piedad-el-castigo-del-terrible-enemigo}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Corran de un lado a otro por las calles de Jerusalén, y
vean ahora, y sepan, y busquen en sus amplios lugares, si pueden
encontrar a un hombre, si hay alguien que actúe con justicia, que busque
la verdad, entonces la perdonaré. \bibleverse{2} Aunque digan: ``Vive
Yahvé'', ciertamente juran en falso''.

\bibleverse{3} Oh Yahvé, ¿no miran tus ojos la verdad? Los has golpeado,
pero no se han afligido. Los has consumido, pero se han negado a recibir
la corrección. Han endurecido sus rostros más que una roca. Se han
negado a regresar. \footnote{\textbf{5:3} Jer 2,30; Is 48,4}

\bibleverse{4} Entonces dije: ``Ciertamente estos son pobres. Son
necios, pues no conocen el camino de Yahvé, ni la ley de su Dios.
\bibleverse{5} Iré a los grandes y les hablaré, porque ellos conocen el
camino de Yavé y la ley de su Dios.'' Pero éstos, de común acuerdo, han
roto el yugo, y han roto las ataduras. \footnote{\textbf{5:5} Jer 2,20}
\bibleverse{6} Por eso un león del bosque los matará. Un lobo de las
tardes los destruirá. Un leopardo vigilará sus ciudades. Todo el que
salga de allí será despedazado, porque sus transgresiones son muchas y
su reincidencia ha aumentado. \footnote{\textbf{5:6} Lev 26,22}

\hypertarget{comienzo-del-discurso-amenazador-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Comienzo del discurso amenazador de
Dios}\label{comienzo-del-discurso-amenazador-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{7} ``¿Cómo puedo perdonarte? Tus hijos me han abandonado y
han jurado por lo que no son dioses. Cuando los había alimentado hasta
la saciedad, cometieron adulterio y se reunieron en tropas en las casas
de las prostitutas. \bibleverse{8} Eran como caballos alimentados que
andaban sueltos. Cada uno relinchaba tras la mujer de su vecino.
\bibleverse{9} ¿No debería yo castigarlos por estas cosas?'' dice el
Señor. ``¿No debería mi alma vengarse de una nación como ésta?
\footnote{\textbf{5:9} Jer 5,29}

\hypertarget{el-juicio-divino-para-el-apuxf3stata-e-incruxe9dulo-desafiante}{%
\subsection{El juicio divino para el apóstata e incrédulo
desafiante}\label{el-juicio-divino-para-el-apuxf3stata-e-incruxe9dulo-desafiante}}

\bibleverse{10} ``Sube a sus muros y destruye, pero no acabes del todo.
Quita sus ramas, porque no son del Señor. \footnote{\textbf{5:10} Jer
  4,27} \bibleverse{11} Porque la casa de Israel y la casa de Judá han
actuado con mucha traición contra mí, dice el Señor.

\bibleverse{12} Han negado a Yahvé y han dicho: ``No es él. El mal no
vendrá sobre nosotros. No veremos espada ni hambre. \bibleverse{13} Los
profetas se convertirán en viento, y la palabra no está en ellos. Así se
hará con ellos''.

\bibleverse{14} Por eso Yahvé, el Dios de los Ejércitos, dice: ``Por
cuanto hablas esta palabra, he aquí que yo haré que mis palabras en tu
boca sean fuego, y que este pueblo sea leña, y que lo devore.

\hypertarget{el-terrible-enemigo}{%
\subsection{El terrible enemigo}\label{el-terrible-enemigo}}

\bibleverse{15} He aquí que yo traigo sobre ti una nación de lejos, casa
de Israel'', dice Yahvé. ``Es una nación poderosa. Es una nación
antigua, una nación cuya lengua no conoces y no entiendes lo que dice.
\footnote{\textbf{5:15} Jer 6,22} \bibleverse{16} Su aljaba es una tumba
abierta. Todos ellos son hombres poderosos. \bibleverse{17} Se comerán
tu cosecha y tu pan, que deberían comer tus hijos y tus hijas. Comerán
tus rebaños y tus manadas. Se comerán tus vides y tus higueras.
Derribarán a espada tus ciudades fortificadas en las que confías.

\hypertarget{la-causa-del-castigo-divino-es-decir-del-exilio}{%
\subsection{La causa del castigo divino, es decir, del
exilio}\label{la-causa-del-castigo-divino-es-decir-del-exilio}}

\bibleverse{18} ``Pero aun en esos días --- dice el Señor --- no acabaré
con ustedes. \bibleverse{19} Sucederá cuando ustedes digan: `¿Por qué el
Señor, nuestro Dios, nos ha hecho todas estas cosas? Entonces les
diréis: `Así como me habéis abandonado y habéis servido a dioses
extranjeros en vuestra tierra, así serviréis a extraños en una tierra
que no es la vuestra.'

\hypertarget{la-ignorancia-del-pueblo-la-codicia-de-las-clases-altas-y-la-deshonestidad-del-clero}{%
\subsection{La ignorancia del pueblo, la codicia de las clases altas y
la deshonestidad del
clero}\label{la-ignorancia-del-pueblo-la-codicia-de-las-clases-altas-y-la-deshonestidad-del-clero}}

\bibleverse{20} ``Anuncia esto en la casa de Jacob, y publícalo en Judá,
diciendo: \bibleverse{21} `Oíd ahora esto, pueblo necio y sin
entendimiento, que tenéis ojos y no veis, que tenéis oídos y no oís:
\footnote{\textbf{5:21} Is 6,9-10} \bibleverse{22} ¿No me teméis?', dice
el Señor; `¿No tembláis ante mi presencia, que he puesto la arena como
límite del mar por decreto perpetuo, para que no pueda pasarlo? Aunque
sus olas se agiten, no pueden prevalecer. Aunque rugan, no pueden pasar
por encima'. \footnote{\textbf{5:22} Job 38,8-11}

\bibleverse{23} ``Pero este pueblo tiene un corazón revuelto y rebelde.
Se han rebelado y se han ido. \bibleverse{24} No dicen en su corazón:
`Temamos ahora a Yahvé, nuestro Dios, que da la lluvia, tanto la primera
como la segunda, a su tiempo, que nos preserva las semanas señaladas de
la cosecha'. \footnote{\textbf{5:24} Hech 14,17}

\bibleverse{25} ``Vuestras iniquidades han desviado estas cosas, y
vuestros pecados os han negado el bien. \footnote{\textbf{5:25} Is 59,2}
\bibleverse{26} Porque en mi pueblo se encuentran hombres malvados.
Acechan, como los cazadores al acecho. Ponen una trampa. Atrapan a los
hombres. \bibleverse{27} Como una jaula llena de pájaros, así están sus
casas llenas de engaños. Por eso se han engrandecido y se han
enriquecido. \bibleverse{28} Han engordado. Brillan; sí, sobresalen en
obras de maldad. No defienden la causa, la causa de los huérfanos, para
prosperar; y no defienden los derechos de los necesitados. \footnote{\textbf{5:28}
  Éxod 22,22; Is 1,23}

\bibleverse{29} ``¿No debería yo castigar por estas cosas?'' dice Yahvé.
``¿No debería mi alma vengarse de una nación como ésta? \footnote{\textbf{5:29}
  Jer 5,9}

\bibleverse{30} ``Una cosa asombrosa y horrible ha sucedido en la
tierra. \bibleverse{31} Los profetas profetizan en falso, y los
sacerdotes gobiernan con su propia autoridad; y a mi pueblo le gusta que
sea así. ¿Qué harás al final de todo esto?

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-terrible-corruption-of-all-the-people-of-jerusalem-compels-the-lord-to-mercilessly-execute-the-punishment-of-the-terrible-enemy}{%
\subsection{The terrible corruption of all the people of Jerusalem
compels the Lord to mercilessly execute the punishment of the terrible
enemy}\label{the-terrible-corruption-of-all-the-people-of-jerusalem-compels-the-lord-to-mercilessly-execute-the-punishment-of-the-terrible-enemy}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Run back and forth through the streets of Jerusalem,
and see now, and know, and seek in its wide places, if you can find a
man, if there is anyone who does justly, who seeks truth, then I will
pardon her. \bibleverse{2} Though they say, `As Yahweh lives,' surely
they swear falsely.'' \bibleverse{3} O Yahweh, don't your eyes look on
truth? You have stricken them, but they were not grieved. You have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction. They have
made their faces harder than a rock. They have refused to return.
\bibleverse{4} Then I said, ``Surely these are poor. They are foolish;
for they don't know Yahweh's way, nor the law of their God.
\bibleverse{5} I will go to the great men and will speak to them, for
they know the way of Yahweh, and the law of their God.'' But these with
one accord have broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. \bibleverse{6}
Therefore a lion out of the forest will kill them. A wolf of the
evenings will destroy them. A leopard will watch against their cities.
Everyone who goes out there will be torn in pieces, because their
transgressions are many and their backsliding has increased.

\hypertarget{beginning-of-gods-threatening-speech}{%
\subsection{Beginning of God's threatening
speech}\label{beginning-of-gods-threatening-speech}}

\bibleverse{7} ``How can I pardon you? Your children have forsaken me,
and sworn by what are no gods. When I had fed them to the full, they
committed adultery, and assembled themselves in troops at the
prostitutes' houses. \bibleverse{8} They were as fed horses roaming at
large. Everyone neighed after his neighbor's wife. \bibleverse{9}
Shouldn't I punish them for these things?'' says Yahweh. ``Shouldn't my
soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

\hypertarget{divine-judgment-for-the-defiant-apostate-and-unbeliever}{%
\subsection{Divine judgment for the defiant apostate and
unbeliever}\label{divine-judgment-for-the-defiant-apostate-and-unbeliever}}

\bibleverse{10} ``Go up on her walls, and destroy, but don't make a full
end. Take away her branches, for they are not Yahweh's. \bibleverse{11}
For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very
treacherously against me,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{12} They have
denied Yahweh, and said, ``It is not he. Evil won't come on us. We won't
see sword or famine. \bibleverse{13} The prophets will become wind, and
the word is not in them. Thus it will be done to them.'' \bibleverse{14}
Therefore Yahweh, the God of Armies says, ``Because you speak this word,
behold, I will make my words in your mouth fire, and this people wood,
and it will devour them.

\hypertarget{the-terrible-enemy}{%
\subsection{The terrible enemy}\label{the-terrible-enemy}}

\bibleverse{15} Behold, I will bring a nation on you from far away,
house of Israel,'' says Yahweh. ``It is a mighty nation. It is an
ancient nation, a nation whose language you don't know and don't
understand what they say. \bibleverse{16} Their quiver is an open tomb.
They are all mighty men. \bibleverse{17} They will eat up your harvest
and your bread, which your sons and your daughters should eat. They will
eat up your flocks and your herds. They will eat up your vines and your
fig trees. They will beat down your fortified cities in which you trust
with the sword.

\hypertarget{the-cause-of-divine-punishment-that-is-of-exile}{%
\subsection{The cause of divine punishment, that is, of
exile}\label{the-cause-of-divine-punishment-that-is-of-exile}}

\bibleverse{18} ``But even in those days,'' says Yahweh, ``I will not
make a full end of you. \bibleverse{19} It will happen when you say,
`Why has Yahweh our God done all these things to us?' Then you shall say
to them, `Just as you have forsaken me and served foreign gods in your
land, so you will serve strangers in a land that is not yours.'

\hypertarget{the-ignorance-of-the-people-the-greed-of-the-upper-classes-and-the-dishonesty-of-the-clergy}{%
\subsection{The ignorance of the people, the greed of the upper classes
and the dishonesty of the
clergy}\label{the-ignorance-of-the-people-the-greed-of-the-upper-classes-and-the-dishonesty-of-the-clergy}}

\bibleverse{20} ``Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in
Judah, saying, \bibleverse{21} `Hear this now, foolish people without
understanding, who have eyes, and don't see, who have ears, and don't
hear: \bibleverse{22} Don't you fear me?' says Yahweh; `Won't you
tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of the
sea by a perpetual decree, that it can't pass it? Though its waves toss
themselves, yet they can't prevail. Though they roar, they still can't
pass over it.' \bibleverse{23} ``But this people has a revolting and a
rebellious heart. They have revolted and gone. \bibleverse{24} They
don't say in their heart, `Let's now fear Yahweh our God, who gives
rain, both the former and the latter, in its season, who preserves to us
the appointed weeks of the harvest.' \bibleverse{25} ``Your iniquities
have turned away these things, and your sins have withheld good from
you. \bibleverse{26} For wicked men are found among my people. They
watch, as fowlers lie in wait. They set a trap. They catch men.
\bibleverse{27} As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of
deceit. Therefore they have become great, and grew rich. \bibleverse{28}
They have grown fat. They shine; yes, they excel in deeds of wickedness.
They don't plead the cause, the cause of the fatherless, that they may
prosper; and they don't defend the rights of the needy. \bibleverse{29}
``Shouldn't I punish for these things?'' says Yahweh. ``Shouldn't my
soul be avenged on such a nation as this? \bibleverse{30} ``An
astonishing and horrible thing has happened in the land. \bibleverse{31}
The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests rule by their own
authority; and my people love to have it so. What will you do in the end
of it?

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{anuncio-renovado-de-la-guerra-inminente-nueva-descripciuxf3n-del-tamauxf1o-del-dauxf1o-interno}{%
\subsection{Anuncio renovado de la guerra inminente; nueva descripción
del tamaño del daño
interno}\label{anuncio-renovado-de-la-guerra-inminente-nueva-descripciuxf3n-del-tamauxf1o-del-dauxf1o-interno}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} ``¡Huyan por seguridad, hijos de Benjamín, del centro de
Jerusalén! Tocad la trompeta en Tecoa y levantad una señal en Bet
Haccherem, porque el mal se asoma desde el norte con una gran
destrucción. \footnote{\textbf{6:1} Jer 4,6} \bibleverse{2} Voy a cortar
la hermosa y delicada, la hija de Sión. \bibleverse{3} Los pastores con
sus rebaños vendrán a ella. Acamparán contra ella por todas partes.
Alimentarán a cada uno en su lugar''. \footnote{\textbf{6:3} Jer 4,17}

\bibleverse{4} ``¡Preparen la guerra contra ella! ¡Levántate! Subamos al
mediodía. ¡Ay de nosotros! Porque el día declina, porque las sombras de
la tarde se extienden. \bibleverse{5} ¡Levántate! Subamos de noche y
destruyamos sus palacios''. \bibleverse{6} Porque el Señor de los
Ejércitos dijo: ``Corta los árboles y levanta un montículo contra
Jerusalén. Esta es la ciudad que hay que visitar. Está llena de opresión
en su interior. \footnote{\textbf{6:6} Jer 5,1} \bibleverse{7} Como un
pozo produce sus aguas, así produce ella su maldad. Se oye en ella
violencia y destrucción. La enfermedad y las heridas están continuamente
ante mí. \bibleverse{8} Sé instruida, Jerusalén, para que mi alma no se
aleje de ti, para que no te convierta en una desolación, en una tierra
deshabitada.''

\hypertarget{santa-ira-del-profeta-por-la-depravaciuxf3n-de-todas-las-personas-especialmente-los-luxedderes-amenaza-de-desastre}{%
\subsection{Santa ira del profeta por la depravación de todas las
personas, especialmente los líderes; Amenaza de
desastre}\label{santa-ira-del-profeta-por-la-depravaciuxf3n-de-todas-las-personas-especialmente-los-luxedderes-amenaza-de-desastre}}

\bibleverse{9} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice: ``Espigarán a fondo el
remanente de Israel como una vid. Vuelve tu mano como un recolector de
uvas a los cestos''.

\bibleverse{10} ¿A quién debo hablar y testificar para que escuchen? He
aquí que su oído está incircunciso y no saben escuchar. He aquí que la
palabra de Yahvé se ha convertido en un oprobio para ellos. No se
deleitan en ella. \bibleverse{11} Por eso estoy lleno de la ira de Yavé.
Estoy cansado de contenerla. ``Viértelo sobre los niños en la calle, y
en la reunión de los jóvenes juntos; porque incluso el marido con la
mujer será tomado, los ancianos con el que está lleno de días.
\bibleverse{12} Sus casas serán entregadas a otros, sus campos y sus
esposas juntos; porque extenderé mi mano sobre los habitantes de la
tierra, dice Yahvé''. \bibleverse{13} ``Porque desde el más pequeño
hasta el más grande, todos son dados a la codicia. Desde el profeta
hasta el sacerdote, todos hacen tratos falsos. \footnote{\textbf{6:13}
  Jer 8,10-12} \bibleverse{14} También han curado superficialmente la
herida de mi pueblo, diciendo: ``¡Paz, paz!'' cuando no hay paz.
\footnote{\textbf{6:14} Ezeq 13,10; Ezeq 13,16; 1Tes 5,3}
\bibleverse{15} ¿Se avergonzaron cuando cometieron la abominación? No,
no se avergonzaron en absoluto, ni pudieron sonrojarse. Por lo tanto,
caerán entre los que caen. Cuando los visite, serán abatidos'', dice
Yahvé.

\hypertarget{todo-el-trabajo-de-dios-ha-sido-en-vano-el-juicio-es-inevitable}{%
\subsection{Todo el trabajo de Dios ha sido en vano; el juicio es
inevitable}\label{todo-el-trabajo-de-dios-ha-sido-en-vano-el-juicio-es-inevitable}}

\bibleverse{16} Dice el Señor: ``Pónganse en los caminos y vean, y
pregunten por las sendas antiguas: ``¿Dónde está el buen camino?'' Y
caminen por él, y encontrarán descanso para sus almas. Pero ellos
dijeron: `No caminaremos por él'. \footnote{\textbf{6:16} Mat 11,29; Jer
  44,16} \bibleverse{17} Puse centinelas sobre ustedes, diciendo:
``¡Escuchen el sonido de la trompeta! Pero ellos dijeron: ``No
escucharemos''. \footnote{\textbf{6:17} Is 52,8; Ezeq 3,17}
\bibleverse{18} Oíd, pues, naciones, y conoced, congregación, lo que hay
entre ellas. \bibleverse{19} ¡Oye, tierra! He aquí que yo traigo sobre
este pueblo el mal, el fruto de sus pensamientos, porque no han
escuchado mis palabras; y en cuanto a mi ley, la han rechazado.
\footnote{\textbf{6:19} Deut 32,1; Is 1,2} \bibleverse{20} ¿Para qué
viene a mí el incienso de Sabá y la caña dulce de un país lejano? Sus
holocaustos no son aceptables, y sus sacrificios no me agradan''.
\footnote{\textbf{6:20} Is 1,11}

\bibleverse{21} Por eso dice el Señor: ``He aquí que yo pongo tropiezos
ante este pueblo. Los padres y los hijos juntos tropezarán con ellos. El
vecino y su amigo perecerán''.

\hypertarget{el-terrible-enemigo-del-norte-ante-el-cual-juduxe1-se-hunde-en-dolor-y-ruina}{%
\subsection{El terrible enemigo del norte, ante el cual Judá se hunde en
dolor y
ruina}\label{el-terrible-enemigo-del-norte-ante-el-cual-juduxe1-se-hunde-en-dolor-y-ruina}}

\bibleverse{22} Dice el Señor: ``He aquí que un pueblo viene del país
del norte. Una gran nación se levantará de los confines de la tierra.
\footnote{\textbf{6:22} Jer 5,15; Deut 28,49} \bibleverse{23} Echan mano
del arco y de la lanza. Son crueles y no tienen piedad. Su voz ruge como
el mar, y montan a caballo, todos dispuestos, como un hombre a la
batalla, contra ti, hija de Sión.'' \footnote{\textbf{6:23} Jer 50,42}

\bibleverse{24} Hemos escuchado su informe. Nuestras manos se debilitan.
La angustia se ha apoderado de nosotros, y los dolores como de mujer de
parto. \bibleverse{25} No salgas al campo ni andes por el camino, porque
la espada del enemigo y el terror están por todas partes.
\bibleverse{26} ¡Hija de mi pueblo, vístete de cilicio y revuélcate en
cenizas! Llora, como por un hijo único, con el más amargo lamento,
porque el destructor vendrá de repente sobre nosotros. \footnote{\textbf{6:26}
  Am 8,10}

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-como-probador-de-metales-su-trabajo-inuxfatil-en-su-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Jeremías como probador de metales: su trabajo inútil en su
pueblo}\label{jeremuxedas-como-probador-de-metales-su-trabajo-inuxfatil-en-su-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{27} ``Te he hecho probador de metales y fortaleza en medio
de mi pueblo, para que conozcas y pruebes su camino. \bibleverse{28}
Todos ellos son graves rebeldes, que andan por ahí calumniando. Son de
bronce y de hierro. Todos ellos hacen negocios corruptos. \footnote{\textbf{6:28}
  Ezeq 22,18} \bibleverse{29} El fuelle sopla ferozmente. El plomo se
consume en el fuego. En vano siguen refinando, pues los malvados no son
arrancados. \bibleverse{30} Los hombres los llamarán plata rechazada,
porque Yahvé los ha rechazado.'' \footnote{\textbf{6:30} Is 1,22}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{renewed-announcement-of-impending-war-new-internal-damage-size-description}{%
\subsection{Renewed announcement of impending war; new internal damage
size
description}\label{renewed-announcement-of-impending-war-new-internal-damage-size-description}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Flee for safety, you children of Benjamin, out of the
middle of Jerusalem! Blow the trumpet in Tekoa and raise up a signal on
Beth Haccherem, for evil looks out from the north with a great
destruction. \bibleverse{2} I will cut off the beautiful and delicate
one, the daughter of Zion. \bibleverse{3} Shepherds with their flocks
will come to her. They will pitch their tents against her all around.
They will feed everyone in his place.'' \bibleverse{4} ``Prepare war
against her! Arise! Let's go up at noon. Woe to us! For the day
declines, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.
\bibleverse{5} Arise! Let's go up by night, and let's destroy her
palaces.'' \bibleverse{6} For Yahweh of Armies said, ``Cut down trees,
and cast up a mound against Jerusalem. This is the city to be visited.
She is filled with oppression within herself. \bibleverse{7} As a well
produces its waters, so she produces her wickedness. Violence and
destruction is heard in her. Sickness and wounds are continually before
me. \bibleverse{8} Be instructed, Jerusalem, lest my soul be alienated
from you, lest I make you a desolation, an uninhabited land.''

\hypertarget{holy-wrath-of-the-prophet-for-the-depravity-of-all-people-especially-leaders-disaster-threat}{%
\subsection{Holy wrath of the prophet for the depravity of all people,
especially leaders; disaster
threat}\label{holy-wrath-of-the-prophet-for-the-depravity-of-all-people-especially-leaders-disaster-threat}}

\bibleverse{9} Yahweh of Armies says, ``They will thoroughly glean the
remnant of Israel like a vine. Turn again your hand as a grape gatherer
into the baskets.'' \bibleverse{10} To whom should I speak and testify,
that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they can't
listen. Behold, Yahweh's word has become a reproach to them. They have
no delight in it. \bibleverse{11} Therefore I am full of Yahweh's wrath.
I am weary with holding it in. ``Pour it out on the children in the
street, and on the assembly of young men together; for even the husband
with the wife will be taken, the aged with him who is full of days.
\bibleverse{12} Their houses will be turned to others, their fields and
their wives together; for I will stretch out my hand on the inhabitants
of the land, says Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{13} ``For from their least even
to their greatest, everyone is given to covetousness. From the prophet
even to the priest, everyone deals falsely. \bibleverse{14} They have
healed also the hurt of my people superficially, saying, `Peace, peace!'
when there is no peace. \bibleverse{15} Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed, neither could
they blush. Therefore they will fall among those who fall. When I visit
them, they will be cast down,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{all-gods-work-has-been-in-vain-judgment-is-unavoidable}{%
\subsection{All God's work has been in vain; judgment is
unavoidable}\label{all-gods-work-has-been-in-vain-judgment-is-unavoidable}}

\bibleverse{16} Yahweh says, ``Stand in the ways and see, and ask for
the old paths, `Where is the good way?' and walk in it, and you will
find rest for your souls. But they said, `We will not walk in it.'
\bibleverse{17} I set watchmen over you, saying, `Listen to the sound of
the trumpet!' But they said, `We will not listen!' \bibleverse{18}
Therefore hear, you nations, and know, congregation, what is among them.
\bibleverse{19} Hear, earth! Behold, I will bring evil on this people,
even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not listened to my
words; and as for my law, they have rejected it. \bibleverse{20} To what
purpose does frankincense from Sheba come to me, and the sweet cane from
a far country? Your burnt offerings are not acceptable, and your
sacrifices are not pleasing to me.'' \bibleverse{21} Therefore Yahweh
says, ``Behold, I will lay stumbling blocks before this people. The
fathers and the sons together will stumble against them. The neighbor
and his friend will perish.''

\hypertarget{the-terrible-enemy-of-the-north-before-whom-judah-sinks-in-pain-and-ruin}{%
\subsection{The terrible enemy of the north, before whom Judah sinks in
pain and
ruin}\label{the-terrible-enemy-of-the-north-before-whom-judah-sinks-in-pain-and-ruin}}

\bibleverse{22} Yahweh says, ``Behold, a people comes from the north
country. A great nation will be stirred up from the uttermost parts of
the earth. \bibleverse{23} They take hold of bow and spear. They are
cruel, and have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride
on horses, everyone set in array, as a man to the battle, against you,
daughter of Zion.'' \bibleverse{24} We have heard its report. Our hands
become feeble. Anguish has taken hold of us, and pains as of a woman in
labor. \bibleverse{25} Don't go out into the field or walk by the way;
for the sword of the enemy and terror are on every side. \bibleverse{26}
Daughter of my people, clothe yourself with sackcloth, and wallow in
ashes! Mourn, as for an only son, most bitter lamentation, for the
destroyer will suddenly come on us.

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-as-a-metal-tester-his-useless-work-in-his-town}{%
\subsection{Jeremías as a metal tester: his useless work in his
town}\label{jeremuxedas-as-a-metal-tester-his-useless-work-in-his-town}}

\bibleverse{27} ``I have made you a tester of metals and a fortress
among my people, that you may know and try their way. \bibleverse{28}
They are all grievous rebels, going around to slander. They are bronze
and iron. All of them deal corruptly. \bibleverse{29} The bellows blow
fiercely. The lead is consumed in the fire. In vain they go on refining,
for the wicked are not plucked away. \bibleverse{30} Men will call them
rejected silver, because Yahweh has rejected them.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{contra-el-culto-puramente-externo-y-la-obvia-desobediencia-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Contra el culto puramente externo y la obvia desobediencia
del
pueblo}\label{contra-el-culto-puramente-externo-y-la-obvia-desobediencia-del-pueblo}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{2} ``Ponte en la puerta de la casa de Yavé y proclama allí
esta palabra, y di: ``Oíd la palabra de Yavé, todos los de Judá, que
entráis por estas puertas para adorar a Yavé''.

\bibleverse{3} El Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
``Enmendad vuestros caminos y vuestras acciones, y os haré habitar en
este lugar. \footnote{\textbf{7:3} Jer 26,13; Is 1,16} \bibleverse{4} No
confíes en palabras mentirosas, diciendo: `Templo de Yavé, templo de
Yavé, templo de Yavé, son estos'. \bibleverse{5} Porque si enmendáis
bien vuestros caminos y vuestras acciones, si hacéis bien la justicia
entre el hombre y su prójimo; \bibleverse{6} si no oprimís al
extranjero, al huérfano y a la viuda, y no derramáis sangre inocente en
este lugar, y no andáis en pos de otros dioses para vuestro propio mal,
\footnote{\textbf{7:6} Éxod 22,21-22} \bibleverse{7} entonces haré que
habitéis en este lugar, en la tierra que di a vuestros padres, desde
siempre y para siempre. \bibleverse{8} He aquí que ustedes confían en
palabras mentirosas que no pueden aprovechar. \bibleverse{9} ¿Robaréis,
asesinaréis, cometeréis adulterio, juraréis en falso, quemaréis incienso
a Baal y caminaréis en pos de otros dioses que no habéis conocido,
\bibleverse{10} y luego vendréis y os presentaréis ante mí en esta casa,
que se llama con mi nombre, y diréis: ``Estamos liberados'', para hacer
todas estas abominaciones? \footnote{\textbf{7:10} Jer 4,10}
\bibleverse{11} ¿Se ha convertido esta casa, que se llama con mi nombre,
en una cueva de ladrones a vuestros ojos? He aquí que yo mismo lo he
visto'', dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{7:11} Mat 21,13}

\hypertarget{el-templo-seruxe1-destruido-tanto-como-lo-fue-antes-el-santuario-en-silo-si-la-gente-continuxfaa-transgrediendo}{%
\subsection{El templo será destruido tanto como lo fue antes el
santuario en Silo si la gente continúa
transgrediendo}\label{el-templo-seruxe1-destruido-tanto-como-lo-fue-antes-el-santuario-en-silo-si-la-gente-continuxfaa-transgrediendo}}

\bibleverse{12} ``Pero ve ahora a mi lugar que estaba en Silo, donde
hice habitar mi nombre al principio, y mira lo que le hice por la maldad
de mi pueblo Israel. \footnote{\textbf{7:12} Juan 18,1; 1Sam 4,12; Sal
  78,60} \bibleverse{13} Ahora bien, como has hecho todas estas obras
--- dice el Señor --- y te hablé, madrugando y hablando, pero no oíste;
y te llamé, pero no respondiste; \footnote{\textbf{7:13} Prov 1,24; Is
  65,12} \bibleverse{14} por lo tanto, haré con la casa que lleva mi
nombre, en la que confías, y con el lugar que te di a ti y a tus padres,
lo mismo que hice con Silo. \footnote{\textbf{7:14} Jer 26,6}
\bibleverse{15} Te echaré de mi vista, como he echado a todos tus
hermanos, a toda la descendencia\footnote{\textbf{7:15} o, semilla} de
Efraín. \footnote{\textbf{7:15} 2Re 17,18; 2Re 17,20; 2Re 17,23}

\hypertarget{rechazo-de-la-intercesiuxf3n-del-profeta-el-culto-iduxf3latra-de-la-reina-pagana-del-cielo}{%
\subsection{Rechazo de la intercesión del Profeta; el culto idólatra de
la reina pagana del
cielo}\label{rechazo-de-la-intercesiuxf3n-del-profeta-el-culto-iduxf3latra-de-la-reina-pagana-del-cielo}}

\bibleverse{16} ``Por lo tanto, no oren por este pueblo. No eleven un
clamor o una oración por ellos ni me intercedan, porque no los
escucharé. \footnote{\textbf{7:16} Jer 11,14; Jer 14,11} \bibleverse{17}
¿No ves lo que hacen en las ciudades de Judá y en las calles de
Jerusalén? \bibleverse{18} Los niños recogen leña, los padres encienden
el fuego y las mujeres amasan la masa para hacer tortas a la reina del
cielo y derramar libaciones a otros dioses, para provocarme a la ira.
\footnote{\textbf{7:18} Jer 44,17} \bibleverse{19} ¿Acaso me provocan a
la ira?'', dice el Señor. ``¿No se provocan a sí mismos, para confusión
de sus propios rostros?''

\bibleverse{20} Por eso dice el Señor Yahvé: ``He aquí que mi cólera y
mi ira se derramarán sobre este lugar, sobre el hombre, sobre el animal,
sobre los árboles del campo y sobre el fruto de la tierra; y arderá y no
se apagará.''

\hypertarget{dios-quiere-obediencia-no-sacrificio-y-no-adoraciuxf3n-elegida-por-uno-mismo}{%
\subsection{Dios quiere obediencia, no sacrificio y no adoración elegida
por uno
mismo}\label{dios-quiere-obediencia-no-sacrificio-y-no-adoraciuxf3n-elegida-por-uno-mismo}}

\bibleverse{21} Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
``Añadan sus holocaustos a sus sacrificios y coman carne. \footnote{\textbf{7:21}
  Sal 50,8-15} \bibleverse{22} Porque no hablé con vuestros padres ni
les ordené el día que los saqué de la tierra de Egipto sobre holocaustos
o sacrificios; \footnote{\textbf{7:22} Miq 6,6-8; 1Sam 15,22}
\bibleverse{23} sino que les ordené esto, diciendo: `Escuchad mi voz, y
yo seré vuestro Dios, y vosotros seréis mi pueblo. Caminen en todo el
camino que yo les mando, para que les vaya bien'. \footnote{\textbf{7:23}
  Éxod 19,5} \bibleverse{24} Pero ellos no escucharon ni prestaron
atención, sino que caminaron en sus propios consejos y en la terquedad
de su malvado corazón, y fueron hacia atrás y no hacia adelante.
\footnote{\textbf{7:24} Jer 11,8; Is 65,2} \bibleverse{25} Desde el día
en que vuestros padres salieron de la tierra de Egipto hasta hoy, os he
enviado a todos mis siervos los profetas, madrugando cada día y
enviándolos. \bibleverse{26} Sin embargo, no me escucharon ni inclinaron
su oído, sino que endurecieron su cuello. Hicieron peor que sus padres.
\footnote{\textbf{7:26} Jer 16,12}

\bibleverse{27} ``Les dirás todas estas palabras, pero no te escucharán.
También los llamarás, pero no te responderán. \bibleverse{28} Les dirás:
`Esta es la nación que no ha escuchado la voz de Yahvé, su Dios, ni ha
recibido instrucción. La verdad ha perecido, y está cortada de su boca'.
\footnote{\textbf{7:28} Jer 5,1}

\hypertarget{la-aborrecible-idolatruxeda-encontraruxe1-una-terrible-expiaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{La aborrecible idolatría encontrará una terrible
expiación}\label{la-aborrecible-idolatruxeda-encontraruxe1-una-terrible-expiaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{29} Córtate el cabello y arrójalo, y levanta un lamento en
las alturas desnudas, porque Yavé ha rechazado y abandonado a la
generación de su ira.

\bibleverse{30} ``Porque los hijos de Judá han hecho lo que es malo a
mis ojos'', dice el Señor. ``Han puesto sus abominaciones en la casa que
se llama con mi nombre, para profanarla. \footnote{\textbf{7:30} Jer
  32,34} \bibleverse{31} Han edificado los lugares altos de Tofet, que
está en el valle del hijo de Hinom, para quemar en el fuego a sus hijos
y a sus hijas, cosa que yo no ordené, ni se me ocurrió. \footnote{\textbf{7:31}
  2Re 23,10; Lev 18,21} \bibleverse{32} Por tanto, he aquí que vienen
días --- dice Yahvé --- en que ya no se llamará `Tofet' ni `Valle del
hijo de Hinom', sino `Valle de la Matanza'; porque enterrarán en Tofet
hasta que no haya lugar para enterrar. \footnote{\textbf{7:32} Jer 19,6}
\bibleverse{33} Los cadáveres de este pueblo serán alimento para las
aves del cielo y para los animales de la tierra. Nadie los espantará.
\footnote{\textbf{7:33} Jer 19,7; Jer 9,22} \bibleverse{34} Entonces
haré cesar de las ciudades de Judá y de las calles de Jerusalén la voz
de júbilo y la voz de alegría, la voz del novio y la voz de la novia;
porque la tierra se convertirá en un desierto.'' \footnote{\textbf{7:34}
  Jer 16,9}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{against-purely-external-worship-and-the-obvious-disobedience-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{Against purely external worship and the obvious disobedience
of the
people}\label{against-purely-external-worship-and-the-obvious-disobedience-of-the-people}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Stand in the gate of Yahweh's house, and proclaim this
word there, and say, `Hear Yahweh's word, all you of Judah, who enter in
at these gates to worship Yahweh.'\,'' \bibleverse{3} Yahweh of Armies,
the God of Israel says, ``Amend your ways and your doings, and I will
cause you to dwell in this place. \bibleverse{4} Don't trust in lying
words, saying, `Yahweh's temple, Yahweh's temple, Yahweh's temple, are
these.' \bibleverse{5} For if you thoroughly amend your ways and your
doings, if you thoroughly execute justice between a man and his
neighbor; \bibleverse{6} if you don't oppress the foreigner, the
fatherless, and the widow, and don't shed innocent blood in this place,
and don't walk after other gods to your own hurt, \bibleverse{7} then I
will cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your
fathers, from of old even forever more. \bibleverse{8} Behold, you trust
in lying words that can't profit. \bibleverse{9} Will you steal, murder,
commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, and walk after
other gods that you have not known, \bibleverse{10} then come and stand
before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, `We are
delivered,' that you may do all these abominations? \bibleverse{11} Has
this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your
eyes? Behold, I myself have seen it,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{the-temple-will-be-destroyed-as-much-as-the-sanctuary-in-shiloh-was-before-if-the-people-continue-to-transgress}{%
\subsection{The temple will be destroyed as much as the sanctuary in
Shiloh was before if the people continue to
transgress}\label{the-temple-will-be-destroyed-as-much-as-the-sanctuary-in-shiloh-was-before-if-the-people-continue-to-transgress}}

\bibleverse{12} ``But go now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I
caused my name to dwell at the first, and see what I did to it for the
wickedness of my people Israel. \bibleverse{13} Now, because you have
done all these works,'' says Yahweh, ``and I spoke to you, rising up
early and speaking, but you didn't hear; and I called you, but you
didn't answer; \bibleverse{14} therefore I will do to the house which is
called by my name, in which you trust, and to the place which I gave to
you and to your fathers, as I did to Shiloh. \bibleverse{15} I will cast
you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brothers, even the
whole offspring\footnote{\textbf{7:15} or, seed} of Ephraim.

\hypertarget{rejection-of-the-intercession-of-the-prophet-the-idolatrous-worship-of-the-pagan-queen-of-heaven}{%
\subsection{Rejection of the intercession of the Prophet; the idolatrous
worship of the pagan queen of
heaven}\label{rejection-of-the-intercession-of-the-prophet-the-idolatrous-worship-of-the-pagan-queen-of-heaven}}

\bibleverse{16} ``Therefore don't pray for this people. Don't lift up a
cry or prayer for them or make intercession to me; for I will not hear
you. \bibleverse{17} Don't you see what they do in the cities of Judah
and in the streets of Jerusalem? \bibleverse{18} The children gather
wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to
make cakes to the queen of the sky, and to pour out drink offerings to
other gods, that they may provoke me to anger. \bibleverse{19} Do they
provoke me to anger?'' says Yahweh. ``Don't they provoke themselves, to
the confusion of their own faces?'' \bibleverse{20} Therefore the Lord
Yahweh says: ``Behold, my anger and my wrath will be poured out on this
place, on man, on animal, on the trees of the field, and on the fruit of
the ground; and it will burn and will not be quenched.''

\hypertarget{god-wants-obedience-not-sacrifice-and-not-self-chosen-worship}{%
\subsection{God wants obedience, not sacrifice and not self-chosen
worship}\label{god-wants-obedience-not-sacrifice-and-not-self-chosen-worship}}

\bibleverse{21} Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: ``Add your
burnt offerings to your sacrifices and eat meat. \bibleverse{22} For I
didn't speak to your fathers or command them in the day that I brought
them out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices;
\bibleverse{23} but this thing I commanded them, saying, `Listen to my
voice, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people. Walk in all
the way that I command you, that it may be well with you.'
\bibleverse{24} But they didn't listen or turn their ear, but walked in
their own counsels and in the stubbornness of their evil heart, and went
backward, and not forward. \bibleverse{25} Since the day that your
fathers came out of the land of Egypt to this day, I have sent to you
all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them.
\bibleverse{26} Yet they didn't listen to me or incline their ear, but
made their neck stiff. They did worse than their fathers.
\bibleverse{27} ``You shall speak all these words to them, but they will
not listen to you. You shall also call to them, but they will not answer
you. \bibleverse{28} You shall tell them, `This is the nation that has
not listened to Yahweh their God's voice, nor received instruction.
Truth has perished, and is cut off from their mouth.'

\hypertarget{hateful-idolatry-will-find-terrible-atonement}{%
\subsection{Hateful idolatry will find terrible
atonement}\label{hateful-idolatry-will-find-terrible-atonement}}

\bibleverse{29} Cut off your hair, and throw it away, and take up a
lamentation on the bare heights; for Yahweh has rejected and forsaken
the generation of his wrath. \bibleverse{30} ``For the children of Judah
have done that which is evil in my sight,'' says Yahweh. ``They have set
their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile
it. \bibleverse{31} They have built the high places of Topheth, which is
in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their
daughters in the fire, which I didn't command, nor did it come into my
mind. \bibleverse{32} Therefore behold, the days come'', says Yahweh,
``that it will no more be called `Topheth' or `The valley of the son of
Hinnom', but `The valley of Slaughter'; for they will bury in Topheth
until there is no place to bury. \bibleverse{33} The dead bodies of this
people will be food for the birds of the sky, and for the animals of the
earth. No one will frighten them away. \bibleverse{34} Then I will cause
to cease from the cities of Judah and from the streets of Jerusalem the
voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom
and the voice of the bride; for the land will become a waste.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-vergonzoso-destino-de-los-iduxf3latras-tras-la-conquista-de-la-tierra}{%
\subsection{El vergonzoso destino de los idólatras tras la conquista de
la
tierra}\label{el-vergonzoso-destino-de-los-iduxf3latras-tras-la-conquista-de-la-tierra}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} ``En aquel tiempo --- dice el Señor --- sacarán de sus
tumbas los huesos de los reyes de Judá, los huesos de sus príncipes, los
huesos de los sacerdotes, los huesos de los profetas y los huesos de los
habitantes de Jerusalén. \bibleverse{2} Los esparcirán delante del sol,
de la luna y de todo el ejército del cielo, al que han amado, al que han
servido, tras el cual han caminado, al que han buscado y al que han
adorado. No serán recogidos ni enterrados. Serán como estiércol en la
superficie de la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{8:2} Deut 4,19; Jer 14,16}
\bibleverse{3} La muerte será elegida antes que la vida por todo el
residuo que quede de esta familia malvada, que permanezca en todos los
lugares a los que los he expulsado'', dice el Señor de los Ejércitos.

\hypertarget{contra-la-gente-impenitente-y-la-arrogancia-de-los-luxedderes-espirituales-los-horrores-del-juicio-inminente}{%
\subsection{Contra la gente impenitente y la arrogancia de los líderes
espirituales; los horrores del juicio
inminente}\label{contra-la-gente-impenitente-y-la-arrogancia-de-los-luxedderes-espirituales-los-horrores-del-juicio-inminente}}

\bibleverse{4} ``Además, les dirás: `Dice el Señor: ``\,`¿Caen los
hombres y no se levantan? ¿Se da la vuelta y no se vuelve?
\bibleverse{5} ¿Por qué, pues, el pueblo de Jerusalén ha retrocedido con
una reincidencia perpetua? Se aferran al engaño. Se niegan a volver.
\bibleverse{6} Escuché y oí, pero no dijeron lo que es correcto. Nadie
se arrepiente de su maldad, diciendo: ``¿Qué he hecho?''Todo el mundo se
dirige a su curso, como un caballo que se lanza de cabeza a la batalla.
\bibleverse{7} Sí, la cigüeña del cielo conoce sus tiempos. La tórtola,
la golondrina y la grulla observan el tiempo de su llegada; pero mi
pueblo no conoce la ley de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{8:7} Is 1,13}
\bibleverse{8} ``\,`¿Cómo decís: ``Somos sabios, y la ley de Yahvé está
con nosotros''? Pero, he aquí que la falsa pluma de los escribas ha
hecho de eso una mentira. \bibleverse{9} Los sabios están decepcionados.
Están consternados y atrapados. He aquí que han rechazado la palabra de
Yahvé. ¿Qué tipo de sabiduría hay en ellos?

\hypertarget{amenaza-contra-los-luxedderes-espirituales-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Amenaza contra los líderes espirituales del
pueblo}\label{amenaza-contra-los-luxedderes-espirituales-del-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{10} Por lo tanto, daré sus esposas a otrosy sus campos a
quienes los posean. Porque todos, desde el más pequeño hasta el más
grande, son dados a la codicia; desde el profeta hasta el sacerdote,
todos tratan con falsedad. \footnote{\textbf{8:10} Jer 6,13-15; Is 56,11}
\bibleverse{11} Han curado ligeramente la herida de la hija de mi
pueblo, diciendo, ``Paz, paz'', cuando no hay paz. \bibleverse{12} ¿Se
avergonzaron cuando cometieron la abominación? No, no estaban
avergonzados en absoluto. No podían sonrojarse. Por lo tanto, caerán
entre los que caen. En el tiempo de su visitación serán abatidos, dice
Yahvé. \bibleverse{13} ``\,`Los consumiré por completo, dice Yahvé. No
habrá uvas en la vid, no hay higos en la higuera, y la hoja se
desvanecerá. Las cosas que les he dadopasará de ellos''.

\hypertarget{los-horrores-del-juicio-de-dios-que-se-lleva-a-cabo-mediante-el-acercamiento-del-enemigo-del-norte}{%
\subsection{Los horrores del juicio de Dios, que se lleva a cabo
mediante el acercamiento del enemigo del
norte}\label{los-horrores-del-juicio-de-dios-que-se-lleva-a-cabo-mediante-el-acercamiento-del-enemigo-del-norte}}

\bibleverse{14} ``¿Por qué nos quedamos quietos? ¡Reúnanse! Entremos en
las ciudades fortificadas, y guardemos silencio allí; porque Yahvé,
nuestro Dios, nos ha hecho callar, y nos han dado de beber agua
envenenada, porque hemos pecado contra Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{8:14}
  Jer 9,15} \bibleverse{15} Buscamos la paz, pero no llegó nada bueno; y
por un tiempo de curación, y he aquí, ¡desconsuelo! \footnote{\textbf{8:15}
  Jer 14,19} \bibleverse{16} El bufido de sus caballos se oye desde Dan.
Toda la tierra tiembla al oír los relinchos de sus fuertes; porque han
venido y han devorado la tierra y todo lo que hay en ella, la ciudad y
los que la habitan''. \bibleverse{17} ``Porque, he aquí, yo enviaré
serpientes, de las víboras entre vosotros, que no será encantado; y te
morderán'', dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{8:17} Ecl 10,11}

\hypertarget{la-desesperanza-del-profeta-y-su-dolor-por-la-alteraciuxf3n-moral-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{La desesperanza del profeta y su dolor por la alteración
moral del
pueblo}\label{la-desesperanza-del-profeta-y-su-dolor-por-la-alteraciuxf3n-moral-del-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{18} ¡Oh, si pudiera consolarme contra el dolor! Mi corazón
desfallece dentro de mí. \footnote{\textbf{8:18} Jer 4,19}
\bibleverse{19} He aquí la voz del grito de la hija de mi pueblo desde
una tierra muy lejana: ``¿No está Yahvé en Sión? ¿No está su Rey en
ella?''\,``¿Por qué me han provocado a la ira con sus imágenes grabadas,
y con ídolos extranjeros?'' \bibleverse{20} ``La cosecha ha pasado. El
verano ha terminado, y no nos salvamos''. \bibleverse{21} Por el dolor
de la hija de mi pueblo, estoy herido. Estoy de luto. La consternación
se ha apoderado de mí. \bibleverse{22} ¿No hay bálsamo en Galaad? ¿No
hay ningún médico allí? ¿Por qué entonces no se recupera la salud de la
hija de mi pueblo? \footnote{\textbf{8:22} Jer 46,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-shameful-fate-of-the-idolaters-after-the-conquest-of-the-earth}{%
\subsection{The shameful fate of the idolaters after the conquest of the
earth}\label{the-shameful-fate-of-the-idolaters-after-the-conquest-of-the-earth}}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} ``At that time,'' says Yahweh, ``they will bring the
bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of his princes, the bones of the
priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, out of their graves. \bibleverse{2} They will spread them
before the sun, the moon, and all the army of the sky, which they have
loved, which they have served, after which they have walked, which they
have sought, and which they have worshiped. They will not be gathered or
be buried. They will be like dung on the surface of the earth.
\bibleverse{3} Death will be chosen rather than life by all the residue
that remain of this evil family, that remain in all the places where I
have driven them,'' says Yahweh of Armies.

\hypertarget{against-unrepentant-people-and-the-arrogance-of-spiritual-leaders-the-horrors-of-the-impending-judgment}{%
\subsection{Against unrepentant people and the arrogance of spiritual
leaders; the horrors of the impending
judgment}\label{against-unrepentant-people-and-the-arrogance-of-spiritual-leaders-the-horrors-of-the-impending-judgment}}

\bibleverse{4} ``Moreover you shall tell them, `Yahweh says: ``\,`Do men
fall, and not rise up again? Does one turn away, and not return?
\bibleverse{5} Why then have the people of Jerusalem fallen back by a
perpetual backsliding? They cling to deceit. They refuse to return.
\bibleverse{6} I listened and heard, but they didn't say what is right.
No one repents of his wickedness, saying, ``What have I done?'' Everyone
turns to his course, as a horse that rushes headlong in the battle.
\bibleverse{7} Yes, the stork in the sky knows her appointed times. The
turtledove, the swallow, and the crane observe the time of their coming;
but my people don't know Yahweh's law. \bibleverse{8} ``\,`How do you
say, ``We are wise, and Yahweh's law is with us?'' But, behold, the
false pen of the scribes has made that a lie. \bibleverse{9} The wise
men are disappointed. They are dismayed and trapped. Behold, they have
rejected Yahweh's word. What kind of wisdom is in them?

\hypertarget{threat-against-the-spiritual-leaders-of-the-town}{%
\subsection{Threat against the spiritual leaders of the
town}\label{threat-against-the-spiritual-leaders-of-the-town}}

\bibleverse{10} Therefore I will give their wives to others and their
fields to those who will possess them. For everyone from the least even
to the greatest is given to covetousness; from the prophet even to the
priest everyone deals falsely. \bibleverse{11} They have healed the hurt
of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, ``Peace, peace,'' when
there is no peace. \bibleverse{12} Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed. They couldn't
blush. Therefore they will fall among those who fall. In the time of
their visitation they will be cast down, says Yahweh. \bibleverse{13}
``\,`I will utterly consume them, says Yahweh. No grapes will be on the
vine, no figs on the fig tree, and the leaf will fade. The things that I
have given them will pass away from them.'\,''

\hypertarget{the-horrors-of-gods-judgment-brought-about-by-the-approach-of-the-enemy-from-the-north}{%
\subsection{The horrors of God's judgment, brought about by the approach
of the enemy from the
north}\label{the-horrors-of-gods-judgment-brought-about-by-the-approach-of-the-enemy-from-the-north}}

\bibleverse{14} ``Why do we sit still? Assemble yourselves! Let's enter
into the fortified cities, and let's be silent there; for Yahweh our God
has put us to silence, and given us poisoned water to drink, because we
have sinned against Yahweh. \bibleverse{15} We looked for peace, but no
good came; and for a time of healing, and behold, dismay!
\bibleverse{16} The snorting of his horses is heard from Dan. The whole
land trembles at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they
have come, and have devoured the land and all that is in it, the city
and those who dwell therein.'' \bibleverse{17} ``For, behold, I will
send serpents, adders among you, which will not be charmed; and they
will bite you,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{the-despair-of-the-prophet-and-his-pain-for-the-moral-alteration-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{The despair of the prophet and his pain for the moral
alteration of the
people}\label{the-despair-of-the-prophet-and-his-pain-for-the-moral-alteration-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{18} Oh that I could comfort myself against sorrow! My heart
is faint within me. \bibleverse{19} Behold, the voice of the cry of the
daughter of my people from a land that is very far off: ``Isn't Yahweh
in Zion? Isn't her King in her?'' ``Why have they provoked me to anger
with their engraved images, and with foreign idols?'' \bibleverse{20}
``The harvest is past. The summer has ended, and we are not saved.''
\bibleverse{21} For the hurt of the daughter of my people, I am hurt. I
mourn. Dismay has taken hold of me. \bibleverse{22} Is there no balm in
Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then isn't the health of the
daughter of my people recovered?

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-se-desespera-de-su-pueblo-moralmente-quebrantado}{%
\subsection{Jeremías se desespera de su pueblo moralmente
quebrantado}\label{jeremuxedas-se-desespera-de-su-pueblo-moralmente-quebrantado}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} Oh, si mi cabeza fuera agua, y mis ojos un manantial de
lágrimas, para llorar día y noche¡por los muertos de la hija de mi
pueblo! \footnote{\textbf{9:1} Jer 13,17; Lam 1,16} \bibleverse{2} Oh,
que tuve en el desiertoun lugar de hospedaje de los caminantes, para
dejar a mi pueblo¡y pasar de ellos! Porque todos son adúlteros, una
asamblea de hombres traidores. \bibleverse{3} ``Doblan la lengua, como
su arco, por la falsedad. Se han hecho fuertes en la tierra, pero no por
la verdad; pues proceden de mal en mal, y no me conocen'', dice Yahvé.
\bibleverse{4} ``Que cada uno se cuide de su prójimo, y no confíes en
ningún hermano; porque cada hermano lo suplantará por completo, y todo
vecino irá por ahí como un calumniador. \footnote{\textbf{9:4} Miq 7,5-6}
\bibleverse{5} Los amigos se engañan entre sí, y no dirá la verdad. Han
enseñado su lengua a hablar mentiras. Se cansan de cometer iniquidades.
\bibleverse{6} Tu morada está en medio del engaño. Mediante el engaño,
se niegan a conocerme'', dice Yahvé.

\bibleverse{7} Por eso dice el Señor de los Ejércitos, ``He aquí que los
fundiré y los pondré a prueba; porque, ¿cómo debo tratar a la hija de mi
pueblo? \bibleverse{8} Su lengua es una flecha mortal. Habla de engaño.
Uno habla pacíficamente con su vecino con la boca, pero en su corazón,
espera para emboscarlo.

\hypertarget{el-lamento-del-profeta-juicio-de-dios-lamentaciones}{%
\subsection{El lamento del profeta; Juicio de Dios;
Lamentaciones}\label{el-lamento-del-profeta-juicio-de-dios-lamentaciones}}

\bibleverse{9} ¿No debería castigarlos por estas cosas?'' dice Yahvé.
``¿No debería mi alma ser vengada en una nación como ésta? \footnote{\textbf{9:9}
  Jer 5,9} \bibleverse{10} Lloraré y me lamentaré por las montañas, y se
lamenta por los pastos del desierto, porque están quemados, para que
nadie pase por ellos; Los hombres no pueden oír la voz del ganado. Tanto
las aves del cielo como los animales han huido. Se han ido. \footnote{\textbf{9:10}
  Jer 4,25; Jer 12,4}

\hypertarget{la-pregunta-del-profeta-y-el-juicio-de-dios-como-respuesta}{%
\subsection{La pregunta del profeta y el juicio de Dios como
respuesta}\label{la-pregunta-del-profeta-y-el-juicio-de-dios-como-respuesta}}

\bibleverse{11} ``Haré de Jerusalén montones, una morada de chacales.
Haré de las ciudades de Judá una desolación, sin habitante''.
\footnote{\textbf{9:11} Jer 26,18}

\bibleverse{12} ¿Quién es lo suficientemente sabio para entender esto?
¿Quién es aquel a quien la boca de Yahvé ha hablado para que lo declare?
¿Por qué la tierra ha perecido y se ha quemado como un desierto, para
que nadie pase por ella? \footnote{\textbf{9:12} Deut 32,29}

\bibleverse{13} Yahvé dice: ``Porque han abandonado mi ley que puse
delante de ellos, y no han obedecido mi voz ni han andado en mis
caminos, \bibleverse{14} sino que han andado según la terquedad de su
propio corazón y según los baales que les enseñaron sus padres.''
\footnote{\textbf{9:14} Jer 7,24} \bibleverse{15} Por eso el Señor de
los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``He aquí que yo alimentaré a
este pueblo con ajenjo y le daré a beber agua envenenada. \footnote{\textbf{9:15}
  Jer 23,15} \bibleverse{16} También los dispersaré entre las naciones,
a las que ni ellos ni sus padres han conocido. Enviaré la espada tras
ellos, hasta que los haya consumido''. \footnote{\textbf{9:16} Lev 26,33}

\hypertarget{lamentaciones-contra-el-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Lamentaciones contra el
pueblo}\label{lamentaciones-contra-el-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{17} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice, ``Considerad, y llamad a
las mujeres de luto, para que vengan. Manda llamar a las mujeres
hábiles, para que vengan. \bibleverse{18} Que se den prisay que se
lamenten por nosotros, para que nuestros ojos se llenen de lágrimasy
nuestros párpados brotan con aguas. \bibleverse{19} Porque se oye una
voz de lamento desde Sión,`¡Cómo estamos arruinados! Estamos muy
confundidosporque hemos abandonado la tierra, porque han derribado
nuestras moradas'\,''. \bibleverse{20} Pero escuchen la palabra de
Yahvé, mujeres. Que tu oído reciba la palabra de su boca. Enseña a tus
hijas los lamentos. Que cada uno enseñe a su vecino un lamento.
\bibleverse{21} Porque la muerte ha subido a nuestras ventanas. Ha
entrado en nuestros palaciospara cortar a los niños del exterior, y los
jóvenes de la calle.

\bibleverse{22} Habla: ``Dice Yahvé, ``\,`Los cadáveres de los hombres
caerán como estiércol en el campo abierto, y como el puñado después de
la cosechadora. Nadie los reunirá'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{9:22} Jer 7,33}

\hypertarget{la-verdadera-auto-fama-circuncisiuxf3n-derecha}{%
\subsection{La verdadera auto-fama; circuncisión
derecha}\label{la-verdadera-auto-fama-circuncisiuxf3n-derecha}}

\bibleverse{23} Yahvé dice, ``No dejes que el sabio se gloríe en su
sabiduría. No dejes que el poderoso se gloríe en su poder. No dejes que
el rico se gloríe en sus riquezas. \bibleverse{24} Pero el que se
gloríe, que se gloríe en esto, que tiene entendimiento, y me conoce, que
yo soy Yahvé, que ejerzo la bondad amorosa, la justicia y la rectitud en
la tierra, porque yo me deleito en estas cosas'', dice Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{9:24} 1Cor 1,31; 2Cor 10,17}

\hypertarget{israel-es-incircunciso-de-corazuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Israel es incircunciso de
corazón}\label{israel-es-incircunciso-de-corazuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{25} ``He aquí que vienen días --- dice Yahvé --- en que
castigaré a todos los que se circuncidan sólo en su carne:
\bibleverse{26} Egipto, Judá, Edom, los hijos de Amón, Moab y todos los
que tienen cortadas las puntas de sus cabellos, que habitan en el
desierto, porque todas las naciones son incircuncisas, y toda la casa de
Israel es incircuncisa de corazón.'' \footnote{\textbf{9:26} Lev 19,27;
  Jer 4,4; Deut 30,6}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiah-despairs-of-his-morally-broken-people}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah despairs of his morally broken
people}\label{jeremiah-despairs-of-his-morally-broken-people}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a spring of
tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of
my people! \bibleverse{2} Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging
place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people and go from them!
For they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.
\bibleverse{3} ``They bend their tongue, as their bow, for falsehood.
They have grown strong in the land, but not for truth; for they proceed
from evil to evil, and they don't know me,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{4}
``Everyone beware of his neighbor, and don't trust in any brother; for
every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will go around
like a slanderer. \bibleverse{5} Friends deceive each other, and will
not speak the truth. They have taught their tongue to speak lies. They
weary themselves committing iniquity. \bibleverse{6} Your habitation is
in the middle of deceit. Through deceit, they refuse to know me,'' says
Yahweh. \bibleverse{7} Therefore Yahweh of Armies says, ``Behold, I will
melt them and test them; for how should I deal with the daughter of my
people? \bibleverse{8} Their tongue is a deadly arrow. It speaks deceit.
One speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart,
he waits to ambush him.

\hypertarget{the-lament-of-the-prophet-gods-judgment-wailing}{%
\subsection{The lament of the prophet; God's Judgment;
Wailing}\label{the-lament-of-the-prophet-gods-judgment-wailing}}

\bibleverse{9} Shouldn't I punish them for these things?'' says Yahweh.
``Shouldn't my soul be avenged on a nation such as this? \bibleverse{10}
I will weep and wail for the mountains, and lament for the pastures of
the wilderness, because they are burned up, so that no one passes
through; Men can't hear the voice of the livestock. Both the birds of
the sky and the animals have fled. They are gone.

\hypertarget{the-prophets-question-and-gods-judgment-as-an-answer}{%
\subsection{The prophet's question and God's judgment as an
answer}\label{the-prophets-question-and-gods-judgment-as-an-answer}}

\bibleverse{11} ``I will make Jerusalem heaps, a dwelling place of
jackals. I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without
inhabitant.'' \bibleverse{12} Who is wise enough to understand this? Who
is he to whom the mouth of Yahweh has spoken, that he may declare it?
Why has the land perished and burned up like a wilderness, so that no
one passes through? \bibleverse{13} Yahweh says, ``Because they have
forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice or
walked in my ways, \bibleverse{14} but have walked after the
stubbornness of their own heart and after the Baals, which their fathers
taught them.'' \bibleverse{15} Therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, says, ``Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with
wormwood and give them poisoned water to drink. \bibleverse{16} I will
scatter them also among the nations, whom neither they nor their fathers
have known. I will send the sword after them, until I have consumed
them.''

\hypertarget{lamentations-against-the-people}{%
\subsection{Lamentations against the
people}\label{lamentations-against-the-people}}

\bibleverse{17} Yahweh of Armies says, ``Consider, and call for the
mourning women, that they may come. Send for the skillful women, that
they may come. \bibleverse{18} Let them make haste and take up a wailing
for us, that our eyes may run down with tears and our eyelids gush out
with waters. \bibleverse{19} For a voice of wailing is heard out of
Zion, `How we are ruined! We are greatly confounded because we have
forsaken the land, because they have cast down our dwellings.'\,''
\bibleverse{20} Yet hear Yahweh's word, you women. Let your ear receive
the word of his mouth. Teach your daughters wailing. Everyone teach her
neighbor a lamentation. \bibleverse{21} For death has come up into our
windows. It has entered into our palaces to cut off the children from
outside, and the young men from the streets. \bibleverse{22} Speak,
``Yahweh says, ``\,`The dead bodies of men will fall as dung on the open
field, and as the handful after the harvester. No one will gather
them.'\,''

\hypertarget{true-self-fame-right-circumcision}{%
\subsection{True self-fame; right
circumcision}\label{true-self-fame-right-circumcision}}

\bibleverse{23} Yahweh says, ``Don't let the wise man glory in his
wisdom. Don't let the mighty man glory in his might. Don't let the rich
man glory in his riches. \bibleverse{24} But let him who glories glory
in this, that he has understanding, and knows me, that I am Yahweh who
exercises loving kindness, justice, and righteousness in the earth, for
I delight in these things,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{israel-is-uncircumcised-in-heart}{%
\subsection{Israel is uncircumcised in
heart}\label{israel-is-uncircumcised-in-heart}}

\bibleverse{25} ``Behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will
punish all those who are circumcised only in their flesh:
\bibleverse{26} Egypt, Judah, Edom, the children of Ammon, Moab, and all
who have the corners of their hair cut off, who dwell in the wilderness,
for all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are
uncircumcised in heart.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-nada-de-los-uxeddolos-y-la-majestad-del-uxfanico-dios-verdadero}{%
\subsection{La nada de los ídolos y la majestad del único Dios
verdadero}\label{la-nada-de-los-uxeddolos-y-la-majestad-del-uxfanico-dios-verdadero}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} ¡Escuchen la palabra que Yahvé les dice, casa de Israel!
\bibleverse{2} Dice el Señor, ``No aprendas el camino de las naciones, y
no te asustes por las señales del cielo; porque las naciones están
consternadas por ellos. \bibleverse{3} Porque las costumbres de los
pueblos son una vanidad; porque uno corta un árbol del bosque, el
trabajo de las manos del obrero con el hacha. \footnote{\textbf{10:3} Is
  44,10-20} \bibleverse{4} Lo adornan con plata y con oro. Lo sujetan
con clavos y con martillos, para que no pueda moverse. \bibleverse{5}
Son como una palmera, de obra torneada, y no hablar. Hay que llevarlos,
porque no pueden moverse. No les tengas miedo; porque no pueden hacer el
mal, ni está en ellos hacer el bien''.

\hypertarget{la-majestad-de-dios-sobre-el-desprecio-de-los-uxeddolos}{%
\subsection{La majestad de Dios sobre el desprecio de los
ídolos}\label{la-majestad-de-dios-sobre-el-desprecio-de-los-uxeddolos}}

\bibleverse{6} No hay nadie como tú, Yahvé. Eres genial, y tu nombre es
grande en el poder. \bibleverse{7} Que no deben temerle, ¿Rey de las
naciones? Porque te pertenece. Porque entre todos los sabios de las
naciones, y en todo su patrimonio real, no hay nadie como tú.
\bibleverse{8} Pero todos juntos son brutos y necios, ¡instruido por los
ídolos! Es sólo madera. \bibleverse{9} Hay plata batida en planchas, que
se trae de Tarsis, y el oro de Uphaz, el trabajo del grabador y de las
manos del orfebre. Su ropa es azul y morada. Todos son obra de hombres
hábiles. \bibleverse{10} Pero Yahvé es el Dios verdadero. Él es el Dios
vivo, y un Rey eterno. Ante su ira, la tierra tiembla. Las naciones no
son capaces de soportar su indignación.

\bibleverse{11} ``Les dirás esto: `Los dioses que no han hecho los
cielos y la tierra perecerán de la tierra y de debajo de los
cielos'\,''. \bibleverse{12} Dios ha hecho la tierra con su poder. Él ha
establecido el mundo por su sabiduría, y por su entendimiento ha
extendido los cielos. \footnote{\textbf{10:12} Jer 51,15-19}
\bibleverse{13} cuando emite su voz, las aguas en los cielos rugen, y
hace que los vapores asciendan desde los confines de la tierra. Hace
relámpagos para la lluvia, y saca el viento de sus arcas. \footnote{\textbf{10:13}
  Sal 135,7; Job 38,24-30} \bibleverse{14} Todo hombre se ha vuelto
bruto y sin conocimiento. Todo orfebre se siente decepcionado por su
imagen grabada; porque su imagen fundida es falsa, y no hay aliento en
ellos. \bibleverse{15} Son una vanidad, una obra de engaño. En el tiempo
de su visita perecerán. \bibleverse{16} La porción de Jacob no es como
éstas; porque él es el creador de todas las cosas; e Israel es la tribu
de su herencia. Yavé de los Ejércitos es su nombre. \footnote{\textbf{10:16}
  Sal 16,5; Deut 32,9}

\hypertarget{la-necesidad-de-las-personas-destinadas-al-exilio-su-queja-sobre-el-juicio-sentenciado-y-su-humilde-sumisiuxf3n-a-la-voluntad-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La necesidad de las personas destinadas al exilio; su queja
sobre el juicio sentenciado y su humilde sumisión a la voluntad de
Dios}\label{la-necesidad-de-las-personas-destinadas-al-exilio-su-queja-sobre-el-juicio-sentenciado-y-su-humilde-sumisiuxf3n-a-la-voluntad-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{17} Recoge tus mercancías de la tierra, tú que vives
asediado. \bibleverse{18} Porque Yahvé dice, ``He aquí que voy a
expulsar a los habitantes de la tierra en este momento, y los
angustiará, para que lo sientan''. \bibleverse{19} ¡Ay de mí por mi
lesión! Mi herida es grave; pero yo dije, ``En verdad esta es mi pena, y
debo soportarla''. \footnote{\textbf{10:19} Sal 77,10} \bibleverse{20}
Mi tienda ha sido destruida, y todas mis cuerdas están rotas. Mis hijos
se han alejado de mí y ya no existen. Ya no hay nadie que extienda mi
tienda, para colocar mis cortinas. \bibleverse{21} Porque los pastores
se han vuelto brutos, y no han consultado a Yahvé. Por lo tanto, no han
prosperado, y todos sus rebaños se han dispersado. \bibleverse{22} La
voz de las noticias, he aquí que viene, y una gran conmoción en el país
del norte, para convertir las ciudades de Judá en una desolación, una
morada de chacales.

\hypertarget{oraciuxf3n-del-pueblo-por-la-gracia-de-dios-y-por-el-castigo-de-los-paganos-rudos}{%
\subsection{Oración del pueblo por la gracia de Dios y por el castigo de
los paganos
rudos}\label{oraciuxf3n-del-pueblo-por-la-gracia-de-dios-y-por-el-castigo-de-los-paganos-rudos}}

\bibleverse{23} Yahvé, sé que el camino del hombre no está en sí mismo.
No está en el hombre que camina dirigir sus pasos. \footnote{\textbf{10:23}
  Prov 16,9; Ecl 9,11} \bibleverse{24} Yahvé, corrígeme, pero con
suavidad; no en su ira, para que no me reduzcas a la nada. \footnote{\textbf{10:24}
  Jer 46,28; Sal 6,1; Hab 1,12} \bibleverse{25} Derrama tu ira sobre las
naciones que no te conocen, y en las familias que no invocan tu nombre;
porque han devorado a Jacob. Sí, lo han devorado, lo han consumido, y
han asolado su morada. \footnote{\textbf{10:25} Sal 79,6}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-nothingness-of-idols-and-the-majesty-of-the-one-true-god}{%
\subsection{The nothingness of idols and the majesty of the one true
God}\label{the-nothingness-of-idols-and-the-majesty-of-the-one-true-god}}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} Hear the word which Yahweh speaks to you, house of
Israel! \bibleverse{2} Yahweh says, ``Don't learn the way of the
nations, and don't be dismayed at the signs of the sky; for the nations
are dismayed at them. \bibleverse{3} For the customs of the peoples are
vanity; for one cuts a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of
the workman with the ax. \bibleverse{4} They deck it with silver and
with gold. They fasten it with nails and with hammers, so that it can't
move. \bibleverse{5} They are like a palm tree, of turned work, and
don't speak. They must be carried, because they can't move. Don't be
afraid of them; for they can't do evil, neither is it in them to do
good.''

\hypertarget{the-majesty-of-god-over-the-contempt-of-idols}{%
\subsection{The majesty of God over the contempt of
idols}\label{the-majesty-of-god-over-the-contempt-of-idols}}

\bibleverse{6} There is no one like you, Yahweh. You are great, and your
name is great in might. \bibleverse{7} Who shouldn't fear you, King of
the nations? For it belongs to you. Because among all the wise men of
the nations, and in all their royal estate, there is no one like you.
\bibleverse{8} But they are together brutish and foolish, instructed by
idols! It is just wood. \bibleverse{9} There is silver beaten into
plates, which is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of
the engraver and of the hands of the goldsmith. Their clothing is blue
and purple. They are all the work of skillful men. \bibleverse{10} But
Yahweh is the true God. He is the living God, and an everlasting King.
At his wrath, the earth trembles. The nations aren't able to withstand
his indignation. \bibleverse{11} ``You shall say this to them: `The gods
that have not made the heavens and the earth will perish from the earth,
and from under the heavens.'\,'' \bibleverse{12} God has made the earth
by his power. He has established the world by his wisdom, and by his
understanding has he stretched out the heavens. \bibleverse{13} When he
utters his voice, the waters in the heavens roar, and he causes the
vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightnings for the
rain, and brings the wind out of his treasuries. \bibleverse{14} Every
man has become brutish and without knowledge. Every goldsmith is
disappointed by his engraved image; for his molten image is falsehood,
and there is no breath in them. \bibleverse{15} They are vanity, a work
of delusion. In the time of their visitation they will perish.
\bibleverse{16} The portion of Jacob is not like these; for he is the
maker of all things; and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance. Yahweh
of Armies is his name.

\hypertarget{the-need-of-people-destined-for-exile-his-complaint-about-the-judgment-sentence-and-his-humble-submission-to-the-will-of-god}{%
\subsection{The need of people destined for exile; his complaint about
the judgment sentence and his humble submission to the will of
God}\label{the-need-of-people-destined-for-exile-his-complaint-about-the-judgment-sentence-and-his-humble-submission-to-the-will-of-god}}

\bibleverse{17} Gather up your wares out of the land, you who live under
siege. \bibleverse{18} For Yahweh says, ``Behold, I will sling out the
inhabitants of the land at this time, and will distress them, that they
may feel it.'' \bibleverse{19} Woe is me because of my injury! My wound
is serious; but I said, ``Truly this is my grief, and I must bear it.''
\bibleverse{20} My tent has been destroyed, and all my cords are broken.
My children have gone away from me, and they are no more. There is no
one to spread my tent any more, to set up my curtains. \bibleverse{21}
For the shepherds have become brutish, and have not inquired of Yahweh.
Therefore they have not prospered, and all their flocks have scattered.
\bibleverse{22} The voice of news, behold, it comes, and a great
commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah a
desolation, a dwelling place of jackals.

\hypertarget{prayer-of-the-people-for-the-grace-of-god-and-for-the-punishment-of-rude-pagans}{%
\subsection{Prayer of the people for the grace of God and for the
punishment of rude
pagans}\label{prayer-of-the-people-for-the-grace-of-god-and-for-the-punishment-of-rude-pagans}}

\bibleverse{23} Yahweh, I know that the way of man is not in himself. It
is not in man who walks to direct his steps. \bibleverse{24} Yahweh,
correct me, but gently; not in your anger, lest you reduce me to
nothing. \bibleverse{25} Pour out your wrath on the nations that don't
know you, and on the families that don't call on your name; for they
have devoured Jacob. Yes, they have devoured him, consumed him, and have
laid waste his habitation.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-vuxednculo-entre-dios-y-el-pueblo-se-ha-roto}{%
\subsection{El vínculo entre Dios y el pueblo se ha
roto}\label{el-vuxednculo-entre-dios-y-el-pueblo-se-ha-roto}}

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{2} ``Oigan las palabras de este pacto, y hablen a los
hombres de Judá y a los habitantes de Jerusalén; \bibleverse{3} y
díganles: Dice Yavé, el Dios de Israel `Maldito el hombre que no escuche
las palabras de este pacto, \footnote{\textbf{11:3} Deut 27,26}
\bibleverse{4} que ordené a vuestros padres el día en que los saqué de
la tierra de Egipto, del horno de hierro,' diciendo: `Obedeced mi voz y
ponedlas por obra, según todo lo que os mando; así seréis mi pueblo, y
yo seré vuestro Dios; \bibleverse{5} para que se cumpla el juramento que
hice a vuestros padres, de darles una tierra que fluye leche y miel,'
como es hoy.'' Entonces respondí y dije: ``Amén, Yahvé''. \footnote{\textbf{11:5}
  Éxod 3,8}

\bibleverse{6} El Señor me dijo: ``Proclamad todas estas palabras en las
ciudades de Judá y en las calles de Jerusalén, diciendo: ``Oíd las
palabras de este pacto y ponedlas por obra. \bibleverse{7} Porque el día
que los saqué de la tierra de Egipto, protesté con insistencia ante
vuestros padres, hasta el día de hoy, madrugando y protestando,
diciendo: ``Obedeced mi voz''. \bibleverse{8} Pero no obedecieron, ni
volvieron su oído, sino que todos anduvieron en la terquedad de su
malvado corazón. Por eso hice recaer sobre ellos todas las palabras de
este pacto que les mandé hacer, pero no las cumplieron''. \footnote{\textbf{11:8}
  Jer 7,24; Jer 7,26}

\hypertarget{el-incumplimiento-del-pacto-y-el-rechazo-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{El incumplimiento del pacto y el rechazo del
pueblo}\label{el-incumplimiento-del-pacto-y-el-rechazo-del-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{9} El Señor me dijo: ``Se ha encontrado una conspiración
entre los hombres de Judá y entre los habitantes de Jerusalén.
\bibleverse{10} Se han vuelto a las iniquidades de sus antepasados, que
se negaron a escuchar mis palabras. Se han ido tras otros dioses para
servirles. La casa de Israel y la casa de Judá han roto mi pacto que
hice con sus padres. \bibleverse{11} Por eso dice el Señor: ``He aquí
que yo traigo sobre ellos un mal del que no podrán escapar; y ellos
clamarán a mí, pero yo no los escucharé. \footnote{\textbf{11:11} Prov
  1,28; Is 1,15} \bibleverse{12} Entonces las ciudades de Judá y los
habitantes de Jerusalén irán a clamar a los dioses a los que ofrecen
incienso, pero no los salvarán en absoluto en el momento de su
aflicción. \footnote{\textbf{11:12} Jer 2,28; Deut 32,37-38}
\bibleverse{13} Porque según el número de tus ciudades están tus dioses,
Judá; y según el número de las calles de Jerusalén has levantado altares
a la cosa vergonzosa, altares para quemar incienso a Baal.'

\bibleverse{14} ``Por tanto, no reces por este pueblo. No levantes
gritos ni oraciones por ellos, porque no los escucharé en el momento en
que clamen a mí a causa de su angustia. \footnote{\textbf{11:14} Jer
  7,16; Jer 14,11}

\hypertarget{los-sacrificios-y-las-ofrendas-elegidas-por-uno-mismo-no-evitan-la-cauxedda-del-pueblo-que-alguna-vez-fue-amado-por-dios}{%
\subsection{Los sacrificios y las ofrendas elegidas por uno mismo no
evitan la caída del pueblo que alguna vez fue amado por
Dios}\label{los-sacrificios-y-las-ofrendas-elegidas-por-uno-mismo-no-evitan-la-cauxedda-del-pueblo-que-alguna-vez-fue-amado-por-dios}}

\bibleverse{15} ¿Qué tiene que hacer mi amado en mi casa, ya que se ha
comportado lascivamente con muchos, y la carne sagrada ha pasado de ti?
Cuando haces el mal, entonces te alegras''. \bibleverse{16} Yahvé llamó
tu nombre: ``Olivo verde'', hermosa con buenos frutos''. Con el ruido de
un gran rugido ha encendido el fuego en él, y sus ramas están rotas.
\bibleverse{17} Porque el Señor de los Ejércitos, que te plantó, ha
pronunciado el mal contra ti, a causa de la maldad de la casa de Israel
y de la casa de Judá, que se han hecho a sí mismas provocando mi ira al
ofrecer incienso a Baal.

\hypertarget{el-intento-de-asesinato-de-los-habitantes-de-anathoth-contra-jeremuxedas-y-su-castigo}{%
\subsection{El intento de asesinato de los habitantes de Anathoth contra
Jeremías y su
castigo}\label{el-intento-de-asesinato-de-los-habitantes-de-anathoth-contra-jeremuxedas-y-su-castigo}}

\bibleverse{18} El Señor me lo hizo saber, y yo lo conocí. Luego me
mostró sus acciones. \bibleverse{19} Pero yo era como un cordero manso
que es llevado al matadero. No sabía que habían urdido planes contra mí,
diciendo``Destruyamos el árbol con sus frutos, y lo separemos de la
tierra de los vivos, para que su nombre no sea más recordado''.
\footnote{\textbf{11:19} Is 53,7} \bibleverse{20} Pero, Yahvé de los
Ejércitos, que juzga con justicia, que pone a prueba el corazón y la
mente, Veré tu venganza sobre ellos; porque a ti te he revelado mi
causa. \footnote{\textbf{11:20} Sal 7,9}

\bibleverse{21} ``Por lo tanto, Yahvé dice acerca de los hombres de
Anatot, que buscan tu vida, diciendo: `No profetizarás en nombre de
Yahvé, para que no mueras por nuestra mano' --- \footnote{\textbf{11:21}
  Jer 1,1} \bibleverse{22} Por lo tanto, Yahvé de los Ejércitos dice:
`He aquí que los castigaré. Los jóvenes morirán a espada. Sus hijos y
sus hijas morirán de hambre. \bibleverse{23} No les quedará ningún
remanente, porque traeré el mal sobre los hombres de Anatot, el año de
su visita'\,''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-link-between-god-and-the-people-has-been-broken}{%
\subsection{The link between God and the people has been
broken}\label{the-link-between-god-and-the-people-has-been-broken}}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Hear the words of this covenant, and speak to the men
of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; \bibleverse{3} and say to
them, Yahweh, the God of Israel says: `Cursed is the man who doesn't
hear the words of this covenant, \bibleverse{4} which I commanded your
fathers in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of
the iron furnace,' saying, `Obey my voice and do them, according to all
which I command you; so you shall be my people, and I will be your God;
\bibleverse{5} that I may establish the oath which I swore to your
fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey,' as it is
today.'' Then I answered, and said, ``Amen, Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{6}
Yahweh said to me, ``Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, `Hear the words of this
covenant, and do them. \bibleverse{7} For I earnestly protested to your
fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even
to this day, rising early and protesting, saying, ``Obey my voice.''
\bibleverse{8} Yet they didn't obey, nor turn their ear, but everyone
walked in the stubbornness of their evil heart. Therefore I brought on
them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do, but
they didn't do them.'\,''

\hypertarget{the-breach-of-the-pact-and-the-rejection-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{The breach of the pact and the rejection of the
people}\label{the-breach-of-the-pact-and-the-rejection-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{9} Yahweh said to me, ``A conspiracy is found among the men
of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{10} They
have turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, who refused to
hear my words. They have gone after other gods to serve them. The house
of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made
with their fathers. \bibleverse{11} Therefore Yahweh says, `Behold, I
will bring evil on them which they will not be able to escape; and they
will cry to me, but I will not listen to them. \bibleverse{12} Then the
cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will go and cry to the
gods to which they offer incense, but they will not save them at all in
the time of their trouble. \bibleverse{13} For according to the number
of your cities are your gods, Judah; and according to the number of the
streets of Jerusalem you have set up altars to the shameful thing, even
altars to burn incense to Baal.' \bibleverse{14} ``Therefore don't pray
for this people. Don't lift up cry or prayer for them; for I will not
hear them in the time that they cry to me because of their trouble.

\hypertarget{sacrifices-and-offerings-chosen-by-oneself-do-not-prevent-the-fall-of-the-people-who-were-once-loved-by-god}{%
\subsection{Sacrifices and offerings chosen by oneself do not prevent
the fall of the people who were once loved by
God}\label{sacrifices-and-offerings-chosen-by-oneself-do-not-prevent-the-fall-of-the-people-who-were-once-loved-by-god}}

\bibleverse{15} What has my beloved to do in my house, since she has
behaved lewdly with many, and the holy flesh has passed from you? When
you do evil, then you rejoice.'' \bibleverse{16} Yahweh called your
name, ``A green olive tree, beautiful with goodly fruit.'' With the
noise of a great roar he has kindled fire on it, and its branches are
broken. \bibleverse{17} For Yahweh of Armies, who planted you, has
pronounced evil against you, because of the evil of the house of Israel
and of the house of Judah, which they have done to themselves in
provoking me to anger by offering incense to Baal.

\hypertarget{the-assassination-attempt-of-the-inhabitants-of-anathoth-against-jeremiah-and-his-punishment}{%
\subsection{The assassination attempt of the inhabitants of Anathoth
against Jeremiah and his
punishment}\label{the-assassination-attempt-of-the-inhabitants-of-anathoth-against-jeremiah-and-his-punishment}}

\bibleverse{18} Yahweh gave me knowledge of it, and I knew it. Then you
showed me their doings. \bibleverse{19} But I was like a gentle lamb
that is led to the slaughter. I didn't know that they had devised plans
against me, saying, ``Let's destroy the tree with its fruit, and let's
cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more
remembered.'' \bibleverse{20} But, Yahweh of Armies, who judges
righteously, who tests the heart and the mind, I will see your vengeance
on them; for to you I have revealed my cause. \bibleverse{21}
``Therefore Yahweh says concerning the men of Anathoth, who seek your
life, saying, `You shall not prophesy in Yahweh's name, that you not die
by our hand'--- \bibleverse{22} therefore Yahweh of Armies says,
`Behold, I will punish them. The young men will die by the sword. Their
sons and their daughters will die by famine. \bibleverse{23} There will
be no remnant to them, for I will bring evil on the men of Anathoth,
even the year of their visitation.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-pregunta-de-jeremuxedas-a-dios-sobre-la-felicidad-de-los-malvados}{%
\subsection{La pregunta de Jeremías a Dios sobre la felicidad de los
malvados}\label{la-pregunta-de-jeremuxedas-a-dios-sobre-la-felicidad-de-los-malvados}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Tú eres justo, Yahvé, cuando me enfrento a ti; Sin
embargo, me gustaría exponer un caso ante usted. ¿Por qué prospera el
camino de los malvados? ¿Por qué están tranquilos los que tratan con
mucha alevosía? \footnote{\textbf{12:1} Job 21,7; Sal 73,3}
\bibleverse{2} Tú los has plantado. Sí, han echado raíces. Crecen. Sí,
producen frutos. Estás cerca de su boca, y lejos de su corazón.
\bibleverse{3} Pero tú, Yahvé, me conoces. Me ves, y pruebas mi corazón
hacia ti. Sácalos como ovejas para el matadero, y prepararlos para el
día de la matanza. \bibleverse{4} Hasta cuándo estará de luto la tierra,
¿y las hierbas de todo el país se marchitan? A causa de la maldad de los
que la habitan, los animales y las aves se consumen; porque dijeron,
``No verá nuestro último fin''. \footnote{\textbf{12:4} Jer 9,10}

\hypertarget{la-respuesta-divina}{%
\subsection{La respuesta divina}\label{la-respuesta-divina}}

\bibleverse{5} ``Si has corrido con los lacayos, y te han cansado,
¿entonces cómo se puede competir con los caballos? Aunque en una tierra
de paz estás seguro, pero, ¿cómo lo harás en el orgullo del Jordán?
\bibleverse{6} Porque incluso tus hermanos, y la casa de tu padre,
¡hasta ellos te han tratado con traición! Incluso ellos han gritado
después de ti. No les creas, aunque te digan palabras bonitas.

\hypertarget{lamento-de-dios-por-su-tierra-devastada-por-los-pueblos-vecinos}{%
\subsection{Lamento de Dios por su tierra devastada por los pueblos
vecinos}\label{lamento-de-dios-por-su-tierra-devastada-por-los-pueblos-vecinos}}

\bibleverse{7} ``He abandonado mi casa. He desechado mi herencia. He
entregado a la amada de mi alma en manos de sus enemigos. \bibleverse{8}
Mi herencia se ha convertido para mí en un león en el bosque. Ella ha
pronunciado su voz contra mí. Por eso la he odiado. \bibleverse{9} ¿Es
mi herencia como un ave de rapiña moteada? ¿Están las aves de rapiña
contra ella por todas partes? Ve, reúne a todos los animales del campo.
Tráelos para devorarlos. \bibleverse{10} Muchos pastores han destruido
mi viña. Han pisoteado mi porción. Han convertido mi agradable porción
en un desierto desolado. \bibleverse{11} La han convertido en una
desolación. Me llora, estando desolado. Toda la tierra queda desolada,
porque a nadie le importa. \bibleverse{12} Los destructores han llegado
a todas las alturas desnudas del desierto; porque la espada de Yahvé
devora desde un extremo de la tierra hasta el otro. Ninguna carne tiene
paz. \bibleverse{13} Han sembrado trigo, y han cosechado espinas. Se han
agotado, y no se aprovecha nada. Se avergonzarán de sus frutos, a causa
de la feroz ira de Yahvé''. \footnote{\textbf{12:13} Deut 28,38; Os 8,7}

\hypertarget{anuncio-de-juicio-y-salvaciuxf3n-para-los-pueblos-paganos-vecinos}{%
\subsection{Anuncio de juicio y salvación para los pueblos paganos
vecinos}\label{anuncio-de-juicio-y-salvaciuxf3n-para-los-pueblos-paganos-vecinos}}

\bibleverse{14} Dice el Señor: ``Con respecto a todos mis malos vecinos,
que tocan la herencia que he hecho heredar a mi pueblo Israel: He aquí
que yo los arrancaré de su tierra, y arrancaré de entre ellos a la casa
de Judá. \bibleverse{15} Sucederá que después de haberlos arrancado,
volveré y me compadeceré de ellos. Los haré volver, cada uno a su
heredad, y cada uno a su tierra. \bibleverse{16} Sucederá que si
aprenden con diligencia los caminos de mi pueblo, para jurar por mi
nombre, `Vive Yahvé'; así como enseñaron a mi pueblo a jurar por Baal,
entonces serán edificados en medio de mi pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{12:16}
  Jer 4,2; Deut 6,13} \bibleverse{17} Pero si no escuchan, entonces
arrancaré a esa nación, arrancándola y destruyéndola'', dice Yahvé.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-question-to-god-about-the-happiness-of-the-wicked}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's question to God about the happiness of the
wicked}\label{jeremiahs-question-to-god-about-the-happiness-of-the-wicked}}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} You are righteous, Yahweh, when I contend with you; yet I
would like to plead a case with you. Why does the way of the wicked
prosper? Why are they all at ease who deal very treacherously?
\bibleverse{2} You have planted them. Yes, they have taken root. They
grow. Yes, they produce fruit. You are near in their mouth, and far from
their heart. \bibleverse{3} But you, Yahweh, know me. You see me, and
test my heart toward you. Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter,
and prepare them for the day of slaughter. \bibleverse{4} How long will
the land mourn, and the herbs of the whole country wither? Because of
the wickedness of those who dwell therein, the animals and birds are
consumed; because they said, ``He won't see our latter end.''

\hypertarget{the-divine-answer}{%
\subsection{The divine answer}\label{the-divine-answer}}

\bibleverse{5} ``If you have run with the footmen, and they have wearied
you, then how can you contend with horses? Though in a land of peace you
are secure, yet how will you do in the pride of the Jordan?
\bibleverse{6} For even your brothers, and the house of your father,
even they have dealt treacherously with you! Even they have cried aloud
after you! Don't believe them, though they speak beautiful words to you.

\hypertarget{lament-of-god-for-his-land-devastated-by-neighboring-towns}{%
\subsection{Lament of God for his land devastated by neighboring
towns}\label{lament-of-god-for-his-land-devastated-by-neighboring-towns}}

\bibleverse{7} ``I have forsaken my house. I have cast off my heritage.
I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.
\bibleverse{8} My heritage has become to me as a lion in the forest. She
has uttered her voice against me. Therefore I have hated her.
\bibleverse{9} Is my heritage to me as a speckled bird of prey? Are the
birds of prey against her all around? Go, assemble all the animals of
the field. Bring them to devour. \bibleverse{10} Many shepherds have
destroyed my vineyard. They have trodden my portion under foot. They
have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness. \bibleverse{11}
They have made it a desolation. It mourns to me, being desolate. The
whole land is made desolate, because no one cares. \bibleverse{12}
Destroyers have come on all the bare heights in the wilderness; for the
sword of Yahweh devours from the one end of the land even to the other
end of the land. No flesh has peace. \bibleverse{13} They have sown
wheat, and have reaped thorns. They have exhausted themselves, and
profit nothing. You will be ashamed of your fruits, because of Yahweh's
fierce anger.''

\hypertarget{announcement-of-judgment-and-salvation-for-neighboring-pagan-peoples}{%
\subsection{Announcement of judgment and salvation for neighboring pagan
peoples}\label{announcement-of-judgment-and-salvation-for-neighboring-pagan-peoples}}

\bibleverse{14} Yahweh says, ``Concerning all my evil neighbors, who
touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit:
Behold, I will pluck them up from off their land, and will pluck up the
house of Judah from among them. \bibleverse{15} It will happen that
after I have plucked them up, I will return and have compassion on them.
I will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his
land. \bibleverse{16} It will happen, if they will diligently learn the
ways of my people, to swear by my name, `As Yahweh lives;' even as they
taught my people to swear by Baal, then they will be built up in the
middle of my people. \bibleverse{17} But if they will not hear, then I
will pluck up that nation, plucking up and destroying it,'' says Yahweh.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{paruxe1bola-del-cinturuxf3n-de-lino}{%
\subsection{Parábola del cinturón de
lino}\label{paruxe1bola-del-cinturuxf3n-de-lino}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{13}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahvé me dijo: ``Ve y cómprate un cinturón de lino,
póntelo en la cintura y no lo metas en el agua''.

\bibleverse{2} Así que compré un cinturón según la palabra de Yahvé, y
me lo puse en la cintura.

\bibleverse{3} La palabra de Yahvé vino a mí por segunda vez, diciendo:
\bibleverse{4} ``Toma el cinturón que has comprado, que está en tu
cintura, y levántate, ve al Éufrates, y escóndelo allí en una hendidura
de la roca.''

\bibleverse{5} Fui, pues, a esconderla junto al Éufrates, como me había
ordenado Yahvé.

\bibleverse{6} Después de muchos días, Yahvé me dijo: ``Levántate, ve al
Éufrates y toma de allí el cinturón que te mandé esconder.''

\bibleverse{7} Entonces fui al Éufrates, cavé y saqué el cinturón del
lugar donde lo había escondido; y he aquí que el cinturón estaba
arruinado. No servía para nada.

\hypertarget{la-interpretaciuxf3n-de-la-paruxe1bola}{%
\subsection{La interpretación de la
parábola}\label{la-interpretaciuxf3n-de-la-paruxe1bola}}

\bibleverse{8} Entonces vino a mí la palabra de Yavé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{9} ``Dice Yavé: `Así arruinaré la soberbia de Judá y el gran
orgullo de Jerusalén. \bibleverse{10} Este pueblo malvado, que se niega
a escuchar mis palabras, que camina en la terquedad de su corazón y que
se ha ido tras otros dioses para servirlos y adorarlos, será como este
cinturón, que no sirve para nada. \footnote{\textbf{13:10} Jer 11,8}
\bibleverse{11} Porque como el cinturón se adhiere a la cintura del
hombre, así he hecho que se adhiera a mí toda la casa de Israel y toda
la casa de Judá --- dice el Señor ---, para que me sirvan de pueblo, de
nombre, de alabanza y de gloria; pero no han querido escuchar.

\hypertarget{la-paruxe1bola-de-las-jarras-de-vino-llenas-y-rotas-llamada-de-advertencia}{%
\subsection{La parábola de las jarras de vino llenas y rotas; Llamada de
advertencia}\label{la-paruxe1bola-de-las-jarras-de-vino-llenas-y-rotas-llamada-de-advertencia}}

\bibleverse{12} ``Por lo tanto, les dirás esta palabra: `Yahvé, el Dios
de Israel, dice: ``Todo recipiente debe llenarse de vino''\,'. Ellos te
dirán: `¿No sabemos ciertamente que todo recipiente debe llenarse de
vino?' \bibleverse{13} Entonces diles: `Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que yo
lleno de embriaguez a todos los habitantes de esta tierra, a los reyes
que se sientan en el trono de David, a los sacerdotes, a los profetas y
a todos los habitantes de Jerusalén. \footnote{\textbf{13:13} Jer
  25,15-18; Is 51,17} \bibleverse{14} Los estrellaré unos contra otros,
a los padres y a los hijos juntos'', dice el Señor: ``No me apiadaré, ni
perdonaré, ni tendré compasión, para no destruirlos''\,''.

\hypertarget{advertencia-de-autoconfianza}{%
\subsection{Advertencia de
autoconfianza}\label{advertencia-de-autoconfianza}}

\bibleverse{15} Escucha y presta atención. No seas orgulloso, porque
Yahvé ha hablado. \bibleverse{16} Denle gloria a Yahvé, su Dios, antes
de provocar la oscuridad, y antes de que tus pies tropiecen con las
montañas oscuras, y mientras buscas la luz, lo convierte en la sombra de
la muerte, y lo convierte en una profunda oscuridad. \bibleverse{17}
Pero si no quieres escucharlo, mi alma llorará en secreto por tu
orgullo. Mi ojo llorará amargamente, y se derrumba con las lágrimas,
porque el rebaño de Yahvé ha sido llevado cautivo. \footnote{\textbf{13:17}
  Jer 9,1}

\hypertarget{discurso-amenazador-para-el-rey-y-la-reina-madre}{%
\subsection{Discurso amenazador para el rey y la reina
madre}\label{discurso-amenazador-para-el-rey-y-la-reina-madre}}

\bibleverse{18} Di al rey y a la reina madre, ``Humíllense. Siéntense,
pues sus coronas han bajado, hasta la corona de tu gloria. \footnote{\textbf{13:18}
  Lam 5,16} \bibleverse{19} Las ciudades del Sur están cerradas, y no
hay nadie que los abra. Judá es llevado cautivo: todos ellos. Están
totalmente cautivos.

\hypertarget{lamento-y-ay-de-jerusaluxe9n}{%
\subsection{Lamento y ay de
Jerusalén}\label{lamento-y-ay-de-jerusaluxe9n}}

\bibleverse{20} Levanta los ojos, y ver a los que vienen del norte.
¿Dónde está el rebaño que te fue entregado? ¿tu hermoso rebaño?
\bibleverse{21} ¿Qué dirás cuando ponga al frente de ti a los que tú
mismo has enseñado a ser amigos tuyos? ¿No se apoderarán de ti las
penas, como de una mujer que está de parto? \bibleverse{22} Si dices en
tu corazón``¿Por qué se me han echado encima estas cosas?''Tus faldas
están descubiertas a causa de la grandeza de tu iniquidad, y tus tacones
sufren violencia. \footnote{\textbf{13:22} Is 47,2-3; Ezeq 16,37}
\bibleverse{23} El etíope puede cambiar de piel, o el leopardo sus
manchas? Entonces, que tú también hagas el bien, que están acostumbrados
a hacer el mal. \footnote{\textbf{13:23} Sal 55,19} \bibleverse{24}
``Por eso los dispersarécomo el rastrojo que pasapor el viento del
desierto. \bibleverse{25} Esta es su suerte, la porción que se te ha
medido de mi parte'', dice Yahvé, ``porque me has olvidado, y confió en
la falsedad''. \bibleverse{26} Por lo tanto, también descubriré tus
faldas sobre tu rostro, y tu vergüenza aparecerá. \footnote{\textbf{13:26}
  Jer 13,22} \bibleverse{27} He visto vuestras abominaciones, incluso
vuestros adulteriosy tus relinchos, la lascivia de tu prostitución, en
las colinas del campo. ¡Ay de ti, Jerusalén! No se te limpiará. ¿Cuánto
tiempo pasará todavía?''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{parable-of-the-linen-belt}{%
\subsection{Parable of the Linen Belt}\label{parable-of-the-linen-belt}}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{13}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh said to me, ``Go, and buy yourself a linen belt,
and put it on your waist, and don't put it in water.'' \bibleverse{2} So
I bought a belt according to Yahweh's word, and put it on my waist.
\bibleverse{3} Yahweh's word came to me the second time, saying,
\bibleverse{4} ``Take the belt that you have bought, which is on your
waist, and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a cleft of
the rock.'' \bibleverse{5} So I went and hid it by the Euphrates, as
Yahweh commanded me. \bibleverse{6} After many days, Yahweh said to me,
``Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take the belt from there, which I
commanded you to hide there.'' \bibleverse{7} Then I went to the
Euphrates, and dug, and took the belt from the place where I had hidden
it; and behold, the belt was ruined. It was profitable for nothing.

\hypertarget{the-interpretation-of-the-parable}{%
\subsection{The interpretation of the
parable}\label{the-interpretation-of-the-parable}}

\bibleverse{8} Then Yahweh's word came to me, saying, \bibleverse{9}
``Yahweh says, `In this way I will ruin the pride of Judah, and the
great pride of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{10} This evil people, who refuse
to hear my words, who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and have
gone after other gods to serve them and to worship them, will even be as
this belt, which is profitable for nothing. \bibleverse{11} For as the
belt clings to the waist of a man, so I have caused the whole house of
Israel and the whole house of Judah to cling to me,' says Yahweh; `that
they may be to me for a people, for a name, for praise, and for glory;
but they would not hear.'

\hypertarget{the-parable-of-the-full-and-broken-wine-jars-warning-call}{%
\subsection{The Parable of the Full and Broken Wine Jars; warning
call}\label{the-parable-of-the-full-and-broken-wine-jars-warning-call}}

\bibleverse{12} ``Therefore you shall speak to them this word: `Yahweh,
the God of Israel says, ``Every container should be filled with
wine.''\,' They will tell you, `Do we not certainly know that every
container should be filled with wine?' \bibleverse{13} Then tell them,
`Yahweh says, ``Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land,
even the kings who sit on David's throne, the priests, the prophets, and
all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness. \bibleverse{14} I
will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons
together,'' says Yahweh: ``I will not pity, spare, or have compassion,
that I should not destroy them.''\,'\,''

\hypertarget{self-confidence-warning}{%
\subsection{Self-confidence warning}\label{self-confidence-warning}}

\bibleverse{15} Hear, and give ear. Don't be proud, for Yahweh has
spoken. \bibleverse{16} Give glory to Yahweh your God, before he causes
darkness, and before your feet stumble on the dark mountains, and while
you look for light, he turns it into the shadow of death, and makes it
deep darkness. \bibleverse{17} But if you will not hear it, my soul will
weep in secret for your pride. My eye will weep bitterly, and run down
with tears, because Yahweh's flock has been taken captive.

\hypertarget{threatening-speech-to-the-king-and-queen-mother}{%
\subsection{Threatening speech to the king and queen
mother}\label{threatening-speech-to-the-king-and-queen-mother}}

\bibleverse{18} Say to the king and to the queen mother, ``Humble
yourselves. Sit down, for your crowns have come down, even the crown of
your glory. \bibleverse{19} The cities of the South are shut up, and
there is no one to open them. Judah is carried away captive: all of
them. They are wholly carried away captive.

\hypertarget{lament-and-woe-to-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Lament and woe to
Jerusalem}\label{lament-and-woe-to-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{20} Lift up your eyes, and see those who come from the
north. Where is the flock that was given to you, your beautiful flock?
\bibleverse{21} What will you say when he sets over you as head those
whom you have yourself taught to be friends to you? Won't sorrows take
hold of you, as of a woman in travail? \bibleverse{22} If you say in
your heart, ``Why have these things come on me?'' Your skirts are
uncovered because of the greatness of your iniquity, and your heels
suffer violence. \bibleverse{23} Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? Then may you also do good, who are accustomed to
do evil. \bibleverse{24} ``Therefore I will scatter them as the stubble
that passes away by the wind of the wilderness. \bibleverse{25} This is
your lot, the portion measured to you from me,'' says Yahweh, ``because
you have forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.'' \bibleverse{26}
Therefore I will also uncover your skirts on your face, and your shame
will appear. \bibleverse{27} I have seen your abominations, even your
adulteries and your neighing, the lewdness of your prostitution, on the
hills in the field. Woe to you, Jerusalem! You will not be made clean.
How long will it yet be?''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{descripciuxf3n-de-la-gran-sequuxeda}{%
\subsection{Descripción de la gran
sequía}\label{descripciuxf3n-de-la-gran-sequuxeda}}

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{14}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} Esta es la palabra de Yahvé que llegó a Jeremías en
relación con la sequía: \bibleverse{2} ``Judá está de luto, y sus
puertas languidecen. Se sientan en negro en el suelo. El grito de
Jerusalén se eleva. \bibleverse{3} Sus nobles envían a sus pequeños a
las aguas. Llegan a las cisternas, y no encontraremos agua. Vuelven con
los vasos vacíos. Están decepcionados y confundidos, y cubrir sus
cabezas. \bibleverse{4} Por el suelo que se agrieta, porque no ha
llovido en la tierra, los aradores están decepcionados. Se cubren la
cabeza. \footnote{\textbf{14:4} Jl 1,11} \bibleverse{5} Sí, también la
cierva en el campo pare y abandone a sus crías, porque no hay hierba.
\bibleverse{6} Los asnos salvajes se paran en las alturas desnudas.
Jadean por aire como chacales. Sus ojos fallan, porque no hay
vegetación.

\hypertarget{solicitud-de-la-gente}{%
\subsection{Solicitud de la gente}\label{solicitud-de-la-gente}}

\bibleverse{7} Aunque nuestras iniquidades testifiquen contra nosotros,
trabajar por tu nombre, Yahvé; porque nuestras rebeliones son muchas.
Hemos pecado contra ti. \footnote{\textbf{14:7} Dan 9,4-14}
\bibleverse{8} Tú, esperanza de Israel, su salvador en el momento de la
dificultad, por qué deberías estar como un extranjero en la tierra, y
como un caminante que se aparta para pasar la noche? \bibleverse{9} Por
qué debes ser como un hombre asustado, como un hombre poderoso que no
puede salvar? Sin embargo, tú, Yahvé, estás en medio de nosotros, y nos
llamamos por tu nombre. No nos dejes. \footnote{\textbf{14:9} Jer 15,16;
  Is 43,7}

\hypertarget{dios-rechaza-la-intercesiuxf3n-del-profeta-y-amenaza-a-los-falsos-profetas-y-a-todo-el-pueblo-con-dificultades-auxfan-mayores}{%
\subsection{Dios rechaza la intercesión del profeta y amenaza a los
falsos profetas y a todo el pueblo con dificultades aún
mayores}\label{dios-rechaza-la-intercesiuxf3n-del-profeta-y-amenaza-a-los-falsos-profetas-y-a-todo-el-pueblo-con-dificultades-auxfan-mayores}}

\bibleverse{10} Yahvé dice a este pueblo: ``Aun así, les ha gustado
vagar. No han frenado sus pies. Por lo tanto, Yahvé no los acepta. Ahora
se acordará de su iniquidad, y castigarlos por sus pecados''.

\bibleverse{11} El Señor me dijo: ``No reces por este pueblo para su
bien. \footnote{\textbf{14:11} Jer 7,16; Jer 11,14} \bibleverse{12}
Cuando ayunen, no escucharé su clamor; y cuando ofrezcan holocaustos y
ofrendas, no los aceptaré, sino que los consumiré con la espada, el
hambre y la peste.'' \footnote{\textbf{14:12} Is 58,3; Jer 6,20}

\bibleverse{13} Entonces dije: ``¡Ah, Señor Yahvé! He aquí que los
profetas les dicen: `No veréis la espada, ni tendréis hambre, sino que
os daré una paz segura en este lugar'\,''.

\bibleverse{14} Entonces el Señor me dijo: ``Los profetas profetizan
mentiras en mi nombre. Yo no los envié. Yo no les ordené. Yo no les
hablé. Te profetizan una visión mentirosa, una adivinación y una cosa de
nada, y el engaño de su propio corazón. \footnote{\textbf{14:14} Jer
  23,21; Jer 27,14-15; Jer 29,8-9} \bibleverse{15} Por eso dice el Señor
acerca de los profetas que profetizan en mi nombre, pero yo no los
envié, y sin embargo dicen: `La espada y el hambre no estarán en esta
tierra'. Esos profetas serán consumidos por la espada y el hambre.
\footnote{\textbf{14:15} Deut 18,20} \bibleverse{16} El pueblo al que
profetizan será expulsado por las calles de Jerusalén a causa del hambre
y de la espada. No tendrán quien los entierre, ni a ellos, ni a sus
esposas, ni a sus hijos, ni a sus hijas, porque derramaré sobre ellos su
maldad. \footnote{\textbf{14:16} Jer 8,2}

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-llora-por-la-gran-angustia-de-juduxe1}{%
\subsection{Jeremías llora por la gran angustia de
Judá}\label{jeremuxedas-llora-por-la-gran-angustia-de-juduxe1}}

\bibleverse{17} ``Les dirás esta palabra: ``\,`Que mis ojos corran con
lágrimas noche y día, y que no cesen; porque la hija virgen de mi pueblo
está rota con una gran brecha, con una herida muy grave. \footnote{\textbf{14:17}
  Jer 9,1} \bibleverse{18} Si salgo al campo, ¡entonces he aquí, los
muertos con la espada! Si entro en la ciudad, entonces, ¡mira a los que
están enfermos de hambre! Porque tanto el profeta como el sacerdote van
por la tierra, y no tienen conocimiento''.

\hypertarget{queja-renovada-y-suxfaplica-urgente-del-profeta}{%
\subsection{Queja renovada y súplica urgente del
Profeta}\label{queja-renovada-y-suxfaplica-urgente-del-profeta}}

\bibleverse{19} ¿Has rechazado por completo a Judá? ¿Tu alma ha
aborrecido a Sión? ¿Por qué nos has golpeado, y no hay curación para
nosotros? Buscamos la paz, pero no llegó nada bueno; y por un tiempo de
curación, y he aquí, ¡desconsuelo! \footnote{\textbf{14:19} Jer 8,15}
\bibleverse{20} Reconocemos, Yahvé, nuestra maldad, y la iniquidad de
nuestros padres; porque hemos pecado contra ti. \bibleverse{21} No nos
aborrezcas, por tu nombre. No deshonres el trono de tu gloria. Recuerda,
y no rompas tu pacto con nosotros. \bibleverse{22} ¿Hay alguno entre las
vanidades de las naciones que pueda hacer llover? ¿O el cielo puede dar
duchas? ¿No eres tú, Yahvé, nuestro Dios? Por lo tanto, te esperaremos;
porque tú has hecho todas estas cosas.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{description-of-the-great-drought}{%
\subsection{Description of the great
drought}\label{description-of-the-great-drought}}

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{14}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} This is Yahweh's word that came to Jeremiah concerning
the drought: \bibleverse{2} ``Judah mourns, and its gates languish. They
sit in black on the ground. The cry of Jerusalem goes up. \bibleverse{3}
Their nobles send their little ones to the waters. They come to the
cisterns, and find no water. They return with their vessels empty. They
are disappointed and confounded, and cover their heads. \bibleverse{4}
Because of the ground which is cracked, because no rain has been in the
land, the plowmen are disappointed. They cover their heads.
\bibleverse{5} Yes, the doe in the field also calves and forsakes her
young, because there is no grass. \bibleverse{6} The wild donkeys stand
on the bare heights. They pant for air like jackals. Their eyes fail,
because there is no vegetation.

\hypertarget{people-request}{%
\subsection{People Request}\label{people-request}}

\bibleverse{7} Though our iniquities testify against us, work for your
name's sake, Yahweh; for our rebellions are many. We have sinned against
you. \bibleverse{8} You hope of Israel, its Savior in the time of
trouble, why should you be as a foreigner in the land, and as a
wayfaring man who turns aside to stay for a night? \bibleverse{9} Why
should you be like a scared man, as a mighty man who can't save? Yet
you, Yahweh, are in the middle of us, and we are called by your name.
Don't leave us.

\hypertarget{god-rejects-the-intercession-of-the-prophet-and-threatens-the-false-prophets-and-all-the-people-with-even-greater-difficulties}{%
\subsection{God rejects the intercession of the prophet and threatens
the false prophets and all the people with even greater
difficulties}\label{god-rejects-the-intercession-of-the-prophet-and-threatens-the-false-prophets-and-all-the-people-with-even-greater-difficulties}}

\bibleverse{10} Yahweh says to this people: ``Even so they have loved to
wander. They have not restrained their feet. Therefore Yahweh does not
accept them. Now he will remember their iniquity, and punish them for
their sins.'' \bibleverse{11} Yahweh said to me, ``Don't pray for this
people for their good. \bibleverse{12} When they fast, I will not hear
their cry; and when they offer burnt offering and meal offering, I will
not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, by famine, and by
pestilence.'' \bibleverse{13} Then I said, ``Ah, Lord Yahweh! Behold,
the prophets tell them, `You will not see the sword, neither will you
have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.'\,''
\bibleverse{14} Then Yahweh said to me, ``The prophets prophesy lies in
my name. I didn't send them. I didn't command them. I didn't speak to
them. They prophesy to you a lying vision, divination, and a thing of
nothing, and the deceit of their own heart. \bibleverse{15} Therefore
Yahweh says concerning the prophets who prophesy in my name, but I
didn't send them, yet they say, `Sword and famine will not be in this
land.' Those prophets will be consumed by sword and famine.
\bibleverse{16} The people to whom they prophesy will be cast out in the
streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword. They will have
no one to bury them---them, their wives, their sons, or their daughters,
for I will pour their wickedness on them.

\hypertarget{jeremiah-cries-for-the-great-anguish-of-judah}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah cries for the great anguish of
Judah}\label{jeremiah-cries-for-the-great-anguish-of-judah}}

\bibleverse{17} ``You shall say this word to them: ``\,`Let my eyes run
down with tears night and day, and let them not cease; for the virgin
daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very
grievous wound. \bibleverse{18} If I go out into the field, then behold,
the slain with the sword! If I enter into the city, then behold, those
who are sick with famine! For both the prophet and the priest go about
in the land, and have no knowledge.'\,''

\hypertarget{renewed-complaint-and-urgent-supplication-from-the-prophet}{%
\subsection{Renewed Complaint and Urgent Supplication from the
Prophet}\label{renewed-complaint-and-urgent-supplication-from-the-prophet}}

\bibleverse{19} Have you utterly rejected Judah? Has your soul loathed
Zion? Why have you struck us, and there is no healing for us? We looked
for peace, but no good came; and for a time of healing, and behold,
dismay! \bibleverse{20} We acknowledge, Yahweh, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against you. \bibleverse{21}
Do not abhor us, for your name's sake. Do not disgrace the throne of
your glory. Remember, and don't break your covenant with us.
\bibleverse{22} Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can
cause rain? Or can the sky give showers? Aren't you he, Yahweh our God?
Therefore we will wait for you; for you have made all these things.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{otro-rechazo-a-una-intercesiuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-y-una-nueva-amenaza-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Otro rechazo a una intercesión de Jeremías y una nueva
amenaza de
Dios}\label{otro-rechazo-a-una-intercesiuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-y-una-nueva-amenaza-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{15}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces el Señor me dijo: ``Aunque Moisés y Samuel
estuvieran delante de mí, mi mente no se volvería hacia este pueblo.
Apártalos de mi vista y deja que salgan. \footnote{\textbf{15:1} Sal
  99,6; Ezeq 14,14} \bibleverse{2} Sucederá que cuando te pregunten:
``¿Por dónde saldremos?'', les dirás: ``Dice el Señor: ``Los que son
para la muerte, a la muerte; los que son para la espada, a la espada;
los que son para el hambre, al hambre; y los que son para el cautiverio,
al cautiverio''. \footnote{\textbf{15:2} Jer 43,11; Zac 11,9}

\bibleverse{3} ``Designaré sobre ellos cuatro clases'', dice Yahvé: ``la
espada para matar, los perros para desgarrar, las aves del cielo y los
animales de la tierra para devorar y destruir. \footnote{\textbf{15:3}
  Ezeq 14,21} \bibleverse{4} Haré que sean arrojados de un lado a otro
entre todos los reinos de la tierra, a causa de Manasés, hijo de
Ezequías, rey de Judá, por lo que hizo en Jerusalén. \footnote{\textbf{15:4}
  2Re 21,11-16; 2Re 23,26}

\hypertarget{el-lamento-de-jeremuxedas-por-los-severos-sufrimientos-de-la-guerra-que-han-afligido-a-jerusaluxe9n-y-auxfan-no-han-sucedido}{%
\subsection{El lamento de Jeremías por los severos sufrimientos de la
guerra que han afligido a Jerusalén y aún no han
sucedido}\label{el-lamento-de-jeremuxedas-por-los-severos-sufrimientos-de-la-guerra-que-han-afligido-a-jerusaluxe9n-y-auxfan-no-han-sucedido}}

\bibleverse{5} Porque ¿quién se apiadará de ti, Jerusalén? ¿Quién te
llorará? ¿Quién vendrá a preguntar por su bienestar? \bibleverse{6} Me
has rechazado'', dice Yahvé. ``Has ido hacia atrás. Por eso he extendido
mi mano contra tiy te destruyó. Estoy cansado de mostrar compasión.
\bibleverse{7} Los he aventado con un abanico en las puertas de la
tierra. Les he quitado hijos. He destruido a mi pueblo. No volvieron de
sus caminos. \footnote{\textbf{15:7} Mat 3,12} \bibleverse{8} Sus viudas
aumentan más que la arena de los mares. He traído sobre ellos contra la
madre de los jóvenes un destructor al mediodía. He hecho que la angustia
y los terrores caigan sobre ella de repente. \bibleverse{9} La que ha
dado a luz a siete languidece. Ha renunciado al espíritu. Su sol se ha
puesto cuando aún era de día. Se ha sentido decepcionada y confundida.
Entregaré sus residuos a la espada ante sus enemigos'', dice Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{15:9} Am 8,9}

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-agotado-en-sus-fuerzas-y-loco-por-dios}{%
\subsection{Jeremías agotado en sus fuerzas y loco por
Dios}\label{jeremuxedas-agotado-en-sus-fuerzas-y-loco-por-dios}}

\bibleverse{10} ¡Ay de mí, madre mía, que me has dado a luz, un hombre
conflictivo! ¡y un hombre de contención para toda la tierra! Yo no he
prestado, ni los hombres me han prestado; pero cada uno de ellos me
maldice. \footnote{\textbf{15:10} Jer 20,14}

\bibleverse{11} Yahvé dijo, ``Ciertamente te fortaleceré para siempre.
Ciertamente haré que el enemigo te suplique en el tiempo del maly en el
tiempo de aflicción. \bibleverse{12} Se puede romper el hierro, incluso
el hierro del norte, y el bronce? \bibleverse{13} Daré tus bienes y tus
tesoros por un botín sin precio, y eso por todos sus pecados, incluso en
todas sus fronteras. \bibleverse{14} Los haré pasar con tus enemigos a
una tierra que no conoces; porque un fuego se enciende en mi ira, que
arderá en ti''. \bibleverse{15} Yahvé, ya sabes. Recuérdame, visítame, y
véngame de mis perseguidores. Eres paciente, así que no me lleves. Sabed
que por vosotros he sufrido reproches. \bibleverse{16} Sus palabras
fueron encontradas, y me los comí. Tus palabras fueron para mí una
alegría y el regocijo de mi corazón, porque me llaman por tu nombre,
Yahvé, Dios de los Ejércitos. \footnote{\textbf{15:16} Ezeq 3,1-3}
\bibleverse{17} No me senté en la asamblea de los que se alegran y se
regocijan. Me senté solo por tu mano, porque me has llenado de
indignación. \bibleverse{18} Por qué mi dolor es perpetuo, y mi herida
incurable, que se niega a ser curado? ¿Serás para mí como un arroyo
engañoso, ¿como las aguas que fallan? \footnote{\textbf{15:18} Jer 30,12}

\hypertarget{la-correcciuxf3n-y-aceptaciuxf3n-del-profeta-por-dios}{%
\subsection{La corrección y aceptación del profeta por
Dios}\label{la-correcciuxf3n-y-aceptaciuxf3n-del-profeta-por-dios}}

\bibleverse{19} Por eso dice Yahvé, ``Si vuelves, entonces te traeré de
nuevo, para que te presentes ante mí; y si sacas lo precioso de lo vil,
serás como mi boca. Volverán a ti, pero no volverás a ellos.
\bibleverse{20} Haré de ti para este pueblo un muro de bronce
fortificado. Lucharán contra ti, pero no prevalecerán contra ti; porque
yo estoy con vosotros para salvarosy para liberarte'', dice Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{15:20} Jer 1,18} \bibleverse{21} ``Te libraré de la
mano de los malvados, y te redimiré de la mano de los terribles''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{another-rejection-of-jeremiahs-intercession-and-a-new-threat-from-god}{%
\subsection{Another rejection of Jeremiah's intercession and a new
threat from
God}\label{another-rejection-of-jeremiahs-intercession-and-a-new-threat-from-god}}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{15}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Yahweh said to me, ``Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet my mind would not turn toward this people. Cast them out
of my sight, and let them go out! \bibleverse{2} It will happen when
they ask you, `Where shall we go out?' then you shall tell them, `Yahweh
says: ``Such as are for death, to death; such as are for the sword, to
the sword; such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are
for captivity, to captivity.''\,' \bibleverse{3} ``I will appoint over
them four kinds,'' says Yahweh: ``the sword to kill, the dogs to tear,
the birds of the sky, and the animals of the earth, to devour and to
destroy. \bibleverse{4} I will cause them to be tossed back and forth
among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh, the son of
Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-lament-for-the-severe-sufferings-of-war-that-have-afflicted-jerusalem-and-have-not-yet-come-to-pass}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's lament for the severe sufferings of war that have
afflicted Jerusalem and have not yet come to
pass}\label{jeremiahs-lament-for-the-severe-sufferings-of-war-that-have-afflicted-jerusalem-and-have-not-yet-come-to-pass}}

\bibleverse{5} For who will have pity on you, Jerusalem? Who will mourn
you? Who will come to ask of your welfare? \bibleverse{6} You have
rejected me,'' says Yahweh. ``You have gone backward. Therefore I have
stretched out my hand against you and destroyed you. I am weary of
showing compassion. \bibleverse{7} I have winnowed them with a fan in
the gates of the land. I have bereaved them of children. I have
destroyed my people. They didn't return from their ways. \bibleverse{8}
Their widows are increased more than the sand of the seas. I have
brought on them against the mother of the young men a destroyer at
noonday. I have caused anguish and terrors to fall on her suddenly.
\bibleverse{9} She who has borne seven languishes. She has given up the
spirit. Her sun has gone down while it was yet day. She has been
disappointed and confounded. I will deliver their residue to the sword
before their enemies,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{jeremiah-exhausted-in-his-strength-and-mad-for-god}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah exhausted in his strength and mad for
God}\label{jeremiah-exhausted-in-his-strength-and-mad-for-god}}

\bibleverse{10} Woe is me, my mother, that you have borne me, a man of
strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have not lent,
neither have men lent to me; yet every one of them curses me.
\bibleverse{11} Yahweh said, ``Most certainly I will strengthen you for
good. Most certainly I will cause the enemy to make supplication to you
in the time of evil and in the time of affliction. \bibleverse{12} Can
one break iron, even iron from the north, and bronze? \bibleverse{13} I
will give your substance and your treasures for a plunder without price,
and that for all your sins, even in all your borders. \bibleverse{14} I
will make them to pass with your enemies into a land which you don't
know; for a fire is kindled in my anger, which will burn on you.''
\bibleverse{15} Yahweh, you know. Remember me, visit me, and avenge me
of my persecutors. You are patient, so don't take me away. Know that for
your sake I have suffered reproach. \bibleverse{16} Your words were
found, and I ate them. Your words were to me a joy and the rejoicing of
my heart, for I am called by your name, Yahweh, God of Armies.
\bibleverse{17} I didn't sit in the assembly of those who make merry and
rejoice. I sat alone because of your hand, for you have filled me with
indignation. \bibleverse{18} Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound
incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will you indeed be to me as a
deceitful brook, like waters that fail?

\hypertarget{the-correction-and-acceptance-of-the-prophet-by-god}{%
\subsection{The correction and acceptance of the prophet by
God}\label{the-correction-and-acceptance-of-the-prophet-by-god}}

\bibleverse{19} Therefore Yahweh says, ``If you return, then I will
bring you again, that you may stand before me; and if you take out the
precious from the vile, you will be as my mouth. They will return to
you, but you will not return to them. \bibleverse{20} I will make you to
this people a fortified bronze wall. They will fight against you, but
they will not prevail against you; for I am with you to save you and to
deliver you,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{21} ``I will deliver you out of
the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem you out of the hand of the
terrible.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{se-supone-que-jeremuxedas-no-debe-tener-familia}{%
\subsection{Se supone que Jeremías no debe tener
familia}\label{se-supone-que-jeremuxedas-no-debe-tener-familia}}

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{16}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces vino a mí la palabra de Yahvé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{2} ``No tomarás mujer, ni tendrás hijos ni hijas, en este
lugar.'' \bibleverse{3} Porque Yahvé dice acerca de los hijos y de las
hijas que nazcan en este lugar, y acerca de sus madres que los hayan
dado a luz, y acerca de sus padres que se hayan convertido en su padre
en esta tierra \bibleverse{4} ``Morirán de forma dolorosa. No serán
lamentados, ni serán enterrados. Serán como estiércol en la superficie
de la tierra. Serán consumidos por la espada y el hambre. Sus cadáveres
serán alimento para las aves del cielo y para los animales de la
tierra''.

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-debe-mantenerse-alejado-de-las-ceremonias-fuxfanebres-y-las-fiestas-felices}{%
\subsection{Jeremías debe mantenerse alejado de las ceremonias fúnebres
y las fiestas
felices}\label{jeremuxedas-debe-mantenerse-alejado-de-las-ceremonias-fuxfanebres-y-las-fiestas-felices}}

\bibleverse{5} Porque Yahvé dice: ``No entres en la casa del luto. No
vayas a lamentarte. No se lamenten, porque he quitado mi paz a este
pueblo --- dice el Señor ---, la bondad y la misericordia.
\bibleverse{6} Tanto los grandes como los pequeños morirán en esta
tierra. No serán enterrados. Los hombres no se lamentarán por ellos, ni
se cortarán, ni se quedarán calvos por ellos. \bibleverse{7} Los hombres
no partirán el pan por ellos en el luto, para consolarlos por los
muertos. Los hombres no les darán a beber la copa del consuelo por su
padre o por su madre.

\bibleverse{8} ``No entrarás en la casa de la fiesta para sentarte con
ellos, para comer y beber''. \bibleverse{9} Porque Yahvé de los
Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``He aquí que yo haré cesar de este
lugar, ante tus ojos y en tus días, la voz del júbilo y la voz de la
alegría, la voz del novio y la voz de la novia. \footnote{\textbf{16:9}
  Jer 7,34}

\hypertarget{justificaciuxf3n-de-estas-visitas-y-anuncio-de-que-la-gente-seruxe1-llevada-al-cautiverio}{%
\subsection{Justificación de estas visitas y anuncio de que la gente
será llevada al
cautiverio}\label{justificaciuxf3n-de-estas-visitas-y-anuncio-de-que-la-gente-seruxe1-llevada-al-cautiverio}}

\bibleverse{10} Sucederá que cuando cuentes a este pueblo todas estas
palabras, y te pregunten: ``¿Por qué ha pronunciado Yahvé todo este gran
mal contra nosotros?'' o ``¿Cuál es nuestra iniquidad?'' o ``¿Cuál es
nuestro pecado que hemos cometido contra Yahvé nuestro Dios?''
\bibleverse{11} entonces les dirás: ``Porque vuestros padres me han
abandonado --- dice Yahvé --- y han caminado en pos de otros dioses, los
han servido, los han adorado, me han abandonado y no han guardado mi
ley. \bibleverse{12} Habéis hecho más mal que vuestros padres, pues he
aquí que cada uno de vosotros camina según la obstinación de su malvado
corazón, de modo que no me escucháis. \footnote{\textbf{16:12} Jer
  7,24-26} \bibleverse{13} Por eso os echaré de esta tierra a la tierra
que no habéis conocido, ni vosotros ni vuestros padres. Allí serviréis a
otros dioses de día y de noche, porque no os mostraré ningún favor'.

\hypertarget{profecuxeda-de-salvaciuxf3n-insertada}{%
\subsection{Profecía de salvación
insertada}\label{profecuxeda-de-salvaciuxf3n-insertada}}

\bibleverse{14} ``Por lo tanto, he aquí que vienen días --- dice el
Señor --- en que ya no se dirá más: ``Vive el Señor, que hizo subir a
los hijos de Israel de la tierra de Egipto''; \footnote{\textbf{16:14}
  Jer 23,7-8} \bibleverse{15} sino: ``Vive el Señor, que hizo subir a
los hijos de Israel de la tierra del norte y de todas las tierras adonde
los había expulsado''. Yo los haré volver a su tierra que les di a sus
padres.

\hypertarget{los-pescadores-y-cazadores-enviados-por-dios-pronto-perseguiruxe1n-cruelmente-al-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Los pescadores y cazadores enviados por Dios pronto
perseguirán cruelmente al
pueblo}\label{los-pescadores-y-cazadores-enviados-por-dios-pronto-perseguiruxe1n-cruelmente-al-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{16} ``He aquí que yo envío a llamar a muchos pescadores ---
dice el Señor --- y ellos los pescarán. Después mandaré llamar a muchos
cazadores, y los cazarán de todos los montes, de todas las colinas y de
las hendiduras de las rocas. \bibleverse{17} Porque mis ojos están en
todos sus caminos. No se ocultan de mi rostro. Su iniquidad no se oculta
a mis ojos. \bibleverse{18} Primero pagaré doblemente su iniquidad y su
pecado, porque han contaminado mi tierra con los cadáveres de sus cosas
detestables, y han llenado mi heredad con sus abominaciones.''

\hypertarget{los-gentiles-reconocen-al-uxfanico-dios}{%
\subsection{Los gentiles reconocen al único
Dios}\label{los-gentiles-reconocen-al-uxfanico-dios}}

\bibleverse{19} Yahvé, mi fuerza, mi fortaleza, y mi refugio en el día
de la aflicción, las naciones vendrán a ti desde los confines de la
tierra, y dirá, ``Nuestros padres no han heredado más que mentiras,
vanidad y cosas en las que no hay beneficio. \bibleverse{20} ¿Debe un
hombre hacer para sí mismo diosesque aún no son dioses?''
\bibleverse{21} ``Por lo tanto, he aquí que les haré saber, esta vez
haré que conozcan mi mano y mi poder. Entonces sabrán que mi nombre es
Yahvé''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiah-is-not-supposed-to-have-a-family}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah is not supposed to have a
family}\label{jeremiah-is-not-supposed-to-have-a-family}}

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{16}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Yahweh's word came to me, saying, \bibleverse{2}
``You shall not take a wife, neither shall you have sons or daughters,
in this place.'' \bibleverse{3} For Yahweh says concerning the sons and
concerning the daughters who are born in this place, and concerning
their mothers who bore them, and concerning their fathers who became
their father in this land: \bibleverse{4} ``They will die grievous
deaths. They will not be lamented, neither will they be buried. They
will be as dung on the surface of the ground. They will be consumed by
the sword and by famine. Their dead bodies will be food for the birds of
the sky and for the animals of the earth.''

\hypertarget{jeremiah-should-stay-away-from-funeral-ceremonies-and-happy-holidays}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah should stay away from funeral ceremonies and happy
holidays}\label{jeremiah-should-stay-away-from-funeral-ceremonies-and-happy-holidays}}

\bibleverse{5} For Yahweh says, ``Don't enter into the house of
mourning. Don't go to lament. Don't bemoan them, for I have taken away
my peace from this people,'' says Yahweh, ``even loving kindness and
tender mercies. \bibleverse{6} Both great and small will die in this
land. They will not be buried. Men won't lament for them, cut
themselves, or make themselves bald for them. \bibleverse{7} Men won't
break bread for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead. Men
won't give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for
their mother. \bibleverse{8} ``You shall not go into the house of
feasting to sit with them, to eat and to drink.'' \bibleverse{9} For
Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: ``Behold, I will cause to
cease out of this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of
mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the
voice of the bride.

\hypertarget{justification-for-these-visits-and-announcement-that-people-will-be-taken-into-captivity}{%
\subsection{Justification for these visits and announcement that people
will be taken into
captivity}\label{justification-for-these-visits-and-announcement-that-people-will-be-taken-into-captivity}}

\bibleverse{10} It will happen, when you tell this people all these
words, and they ask you, `Why has Yahweh pronounced all this great evil
against us?' or `What is our iniquity?' or `What is our sin that we have
committed against Yahweh our God?' \bibleverse{11} then you shall tell
them, `Because your fathers have forsaken me,' says Yahweh, `and have
walked after other gods, have served them, have worshiped them, have
forsaken me, and have not kept my law. \bibleverse{12} You have done
evil more than your fathers, for behold, you each walk after the
stubbornness of his evil heart, so that you don't listen to me.
\bibleverse{13} Therefore I will cast you out of this land into the land
that you have not known, neither you nor your fathers. There you will
serve other gods day and night, for I will show you no favor.'

\hypertarget{prophecy-of-salvation-inserted}{%
\subsection{Prophecy of salvation
inserted}\label{prophecy-of-salvation-inserted}}

\bibleverse{14} ``Therefore behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that
it will no more be said, `As Yahweh lives, who brought up the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt;' \bibleverse{15} but, `As Yahweh
lives, who brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north,
and from all the countries where he had driven them.' I will bring them
again into their land that I gave to their fathers.

\hypertarget{the-fishermen-and-hunters-sent-by-god-will-soon-cruelly-persecute-the-people}{%
\subsection{The fishermen and hunters sent by God will soon cruelly
persecute the
people}\label{the-fishermen-and-hunters-sent-by-god-will-soon-cruelly-persecute-the-people}}

\bibleverse{16} ``Behold, I will send for many fishermen,'' says Yahweh,
``and they will fish them up. Afterward I will send for many hunters,
and they will hunt them from every mountain, from every hill, and out of
the clefts of the rocks. \bibleverse{17} For my eyes are on all their
ways. They are not hidden from my face. Their iniquity isn't concealed
from my eyes. \bibleverse{18} First I will recompense their iniquity and
their sin double, because they have polluted my land with the carcasses
of their detestable things, and have filled my inheritance with their
abominations.''

\hypertarget{gentiles-recognize-the-one-god}{%
\subsection{Gentiles recognize the one
God}\label{gentiles-recognize-the-one-god}}

\bibleverse{19} Yahweh, my strength, my stronghold, and my refuge in the
day of affliction, the nations will come to you from the ends of the
earth, and will say, ``Our fathers have inherited nothing but lies,
vanity and things in which there is no profit. \bibleverse{20} Should a
man make to himself gods which yet are no gods?'' \bibleverse{21}
``Therefore behold, I will cause them to know, this once I will cause
them to know my hand and my might. Then they will know that my name is
Yahweh.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-culpa-imperdonable-de-juduxe1-y-el-severo-castigo-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La culpa imperdonable de Judá y el severo castigo de
Dios}\label{la-culpa-imperdonable-de-juduxe1-y-el-severo-castigo-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-32}{%
\section{17}\label{section-32}}

\bibleverse{1} ``El pecado de Judá está escrito con una pluma de hierro,
y con la punta de un diamante. Está grabado en la tabla de su corazón, y
en los cuernos de sus altares. \bibleverse{2} Incluso sus hijos
recuerdan sus altaresy sus postes de Asera junto a los verdes árboles de
las altas colinas. \bibleverse{3} Mi montaña en el campo, Daré tu
sustancia y todos tus tesoros como botín, y tus lugares altos, a causa
del pecado, en todas tus fronteras. \bibleverse{4} Tú, incluso de ti
mismo, dejarás de lado tu herencia que te di. Te haré servir a tus
enemigos en la tierra que no conoces, porque has encendido un fuego en
mi ira que arderá para siempre''. \footnote{\textbf{17:4} Jer 15,14}

\hypertarget{confianza-falsa-en-las-personas-y-confianza-correcta-en-dios-y-sus-frutos}{%
\subsection{Confianza falsa en las personas y confianza correcta en Dios
y sus
frutos}\label{confianza-falsa-en-las-personas-y-confianza-correcta-en-dios-y-sus-frutos}}

\bibleverse{5} Yahvé dice: ``Maldito el hombre que confía en el hombre,
se basa en la fuerza de la carne, y cuyo corazón se aparta de Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{17:5} Sal 118,8; Sal 146,3} \bibleverse{6} Porque será
como un arbusto en el desierto, y no verán cuando llegue el bien, sino
que habitará los lugares resecos del desierto, una tierra salada
deshabitada. \footnote{\textbf{17:6} Jer 48,6} \bibleverse{7} ``Dichoso
el hombre que confía en Yahvé, y cuya confianza está en Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{17:7} Sal 146,5} \bibleverse{8} Porque será como un
árbol plantado junto a las aguas, que extiende sus raíces junto al río,
y no temerá cuando llegue el calor, pero su hoja será verde, y no se
preocupará en el año de la sequía. No dejará de dar frutos.

\hypertarget{dos-dichos-de-la-experiencia-de-vida-el-corazuxf3n-humano-y-la-incertidumbre-de-la-ganancia-injusta}{%
\subsection{Dos dichos de la experiencia de vida: el corazón humano y la
incertidumbre de la ganancia
injusta}\label{dos-dichos-de-la-experiencia-de-vida-el-corazuxf3n-humano-y-la-incertidumbre-de-la-ganancia-injusta}}

\bibleverse{9} El corazón es engañoso sobre todas las cosasy es
sumamente corrupto. ¿Quién puede saberlo? \footnote{\textbf{17:9} Sal
  1,3} \bibleverse{10} ``Yo, Yahvé, escudriño la mente. Pruebo el
corazón, para dar a cada uno según sus caminos, según el fruto de sus
obras''. \footnote{\textbf{17:10} Sal 7,9; Rom 2,6} \bibleverse{11} Como
la perdiz que se sienta sobre los huevos que no ha puesto, así es el que
se enriquece, y no por derecho. En la mitad de sus días, lo dejarán. Al
final, será un tonto. \footnote{\textbf{17:11} Sal 39,6}

\hypertarget{la-gloriosa-posesiuxf3n-de-israel}{%
\subsection{La gloriosa posesión de
Israel}\label{la-gloriosa-posesiuxf3n-de-israel}}

\bibleverse{12} Un trono glorioso, puesto en alto desde el principio, es
el lugar de nuestro santuario. \bibleverse{13} Yahvé, la esperanza de
Israel, todos los que te abandonen serán decepcionados. Los que se
aparten de mí estarán escritos en la tierra, porque han abandonado a
Yahvé, el manantial de aguas vivas. \footnote{\textbf{17:13} Jer 2,13}

\hypertarget{la-oraciuxf3n-de-venganza-de-jeremuxedas-contra-los-burladores-y-oponentes}{%
\subsection{La oración de venganza de Jeremías contra los burladores y
oponentes}\label{la-oraciuxf3n-de-venganza-de-jeremuxedas-contra-los-burladores-y-oponentes}}

\bibleverse{14} Sáname, oh Yahvé, y seré curado. Sálvame, y seré
salvado; porque tú eres mi alabanza. \bibleverse{15} He aquí que me
preguntan, ``¿Dónde está la palabra de Yahvé? Que se cumpla ahora''.
\footnote{\textbf{17:15} Is 5,19} \bibleverse{16} En cuanto a mí, no me
he apresurado a dejar de ser pastor después de ti. No he deseado el día
lamentable. Ya sabes. Lo que salió de mis labios fue ante tu cara.
\bibleverse{17} No seas un terror para mí. Tú eres mi refugio en el día
del mal. \bibleverse{18} Que se decepcionen los que me persiguen, pero
no dejes que me decepcione. Que se consternen, pero no dejes que me
desanime. Trae sobre ellos el día del mal, y destruirlos con una doble
destrucción.

\hypertarget{ampliaciuxf3n-de-la-observancia-del-suxe1bado-con-las-correspondientes-promesas-y-amenazas}{%
\subsection{Ampliación de la observancia del sábado con las
correspondientes promesas y
amenazas}\label{ampliaciuxf3n-de-la-observancia-del-suxe1bado-con-las-correspondientes-promesas-y-amenazas}}

\bibleverse{19} El Señor me dijo esto ``Ve y ponte en la puerta de los
hijos del pueblo, por la que entran los reyes de Judá y por la que
salen, y en todas las puertas de Jerusalén. \bibleverse{20} Diles:
``Escuchen la palabra del Señor, ustedes, reyes de Judá, todo Judá y
todos los habitantes de Jerusalén, que entran por estas puertas:
\bibleverse{21} El Señor dice: ``Tengan cuidado y no lleven carga en el
día de reposo, ni la introduzcan por las puertas de Jerusalén.
\bibleverse{22} No saquen carga de sus casas en el día de reposo. No
hagáis ningún trabajo, sino santificad el día de reposo, como he mandado
a vuestros padres. \footnote{\textbf{17:22} Is 56,2; Is 58,13}
\bibleverse{23} Pero ellos no escucharon. No volvieron su oído, sino que
endurecieron su cuello, para no oír y no recibir instrucción.
\footnote{\textbf{17:23} Jer 11,8} \bibleverse{24} Sucederá que si me
escuchan con diligencia --- dice el Señor ---, no introducirán ninguna
carga por las puertas de esta ciudad en el día de reposo, sino que
santificarán el día de reposo y no harán ningún trabajo en él;
\bibleverse{25} entonces entrarán por las puertas de esta ciudad reyes y
príncipes sentados en el trono de David, montados en carros y en
caballos, ellos y sus príncipes, los hombres de Judá y los habitantes de
Jerusalén; y esta ciudad permanecerá para siempre. \bibleverse{26}
Vendrán de las ciudades de Judá y de los lugares que rodean a Jerusalén,
de la tierra de Benjamín, de la llanura, de la región montañosa y del
sur, trayendo holocaustos, sacrificios, ofrendas de comida e incienso, y
trayendo sacrificios de acción de gracias a la casa de Yahvé.
\bibleverse{27} Pero si no me escuchan para santificar el día de reposo,
y para no llevar carga y entrar por las puertas de Jerusalén en día de
reposo, entonces encenderé un fuego en sus puertas, que devorará los
palacios de Jerusalén. No se apagará''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{judahs-unforgivable-guilt-and-gods-severe-punishment}{%
\subsection{Judah's unforgivable guilt and God's severe
punishment}\label{judahs-unforgivable-guilt-and-gods-severe-punishment}}

\hypertarget{section-33}{%
\section{17}\label{section-33}}

\bibleverse{1} ``The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and
with the point of a diamond. It is engraved on the tablet of their
heart, and on the horns of your altars. \bibleverse{2} Even their
children remember their altars and their Asherah poles by the green
trees on the high hills. \bibleverse{3} My mountain in the field, I will
give your substance and all your treasures for a plunder, and your high
places, because of sin, throughout all your borders. \bibleverse{4} You,
even of yourself, will discontinue from your heritage that I gave you. I
will cause you to serve your enemies in the land which you don't know,
for you have kindled a fire in my anger which will burn forever.''

\hypertarget{false-trust-in-people-and-correct-trust-in-god-and-his-fruits}{%
\subsection{False trust in people and correct trust in God and his
fruits}\label{false-trust-in-people-and-correct-trust-in-god-and-his-fruits}}

\bibleverse{5} Yahweh says: ``Cursed is the man who trusts in man,
relies on strength of flesh, and whose heart departs from Yahweh.
\bibleverse{6} For he will be like a bush in the desert, and will not
see when good comes, but will inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness, an uninhabited salt land. \bibleverse{7} ``Blessed is the
man who trusts in Yahweh, and whose confidence is in Yahweh.
\bibleverse{8} For he will be as a tree planted by the waters, who
spreads out its roots by the river, and will not fear when heat comes,
but its leaf will be green, and will not be concerned in the year of
drought. It won't cease from yielding fruit.

\hypertarget{two-sayings-from-life-experience-the-human-heart-and-the-uncertainty-of-unfair-gain}{%
\subsection{Two sayings from life experience: the human heart and the
uncertainty of unfair
gain}\label{two-sayings-from-life-experience-the-human-heart-and-the-uncertainty-of-unfair-gain}}

\bibleverse{9} The heart is deceitful above all things and it is
exceedingly corrupt. Who can know it? \bibleverse{10} ``I, Yahweh,
search the mind. I try the heart, even to give every man according to
his ways, according to the fruit of his doings.'' \bibleverse{11} As the
partridge that sits on eggs which she has not laid, so is he who gets
riches, and not by right. In the middle of his days, they will leave
him. At his end, he will be a fool.

\hypertarget{the-glorious-possession-of-israel}{%
\subsection{The glorious possession of
Israel}\label{the-glorious-possession-of-israel}}

\bibleverse{12} A glorious throne, set on high from the beginning, is
the place of our sanctuary. \bibleverse{13} Yahweh, the hope of Israel,
all who forsake you will be disappointed. Those who depart from me will
be written in the earth, because they have forsaken Yahweh, the spring
of living waters.

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-prayer-for-vengeance-against-scoffers-and-opponents}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's prayer for vengeance against scoffers and
opponents}\label{jeremiahs-prayer-for-vengeance-against-scoffers-and-opponents}}

\bibleverse{14} Heal me, O Yahweh, and I will be healed. Save me, and I
will be saved; for you are my praise. \bibleverse{15} Behold, they ask
me, ``Where is Yahweh's word? Let it be fulfilled now.'' \bibleverse{16}
As for me, I have not hurried from being a shepherd after you. I haven't
desired the woeful day. You know. That which came out of my lips was
before your face. \bibleverse{17} Don't be a terror to me. You are my
refuge in the day of evil. \bibleverse{18} Let them be disappointed who
persecute me, but don't let me be disappointed. Let them be dismayed,
but don't let me be dismayed. Bring on them the day of evil, and destroy
them with double destruction.

\hypertarget{extension-of-sabbath-observance-with-corresponding-promises-and-threats}{%
\subsection{Extension of Sabbath observance with corresponding promises
and
threats}\label{extension-of-sabbath-observance-with-corresponding-promises-and-threats}}

\bibleverse{19} Yahweh said this to me: ``Go and stand in the gate of
the children of the people, through which the kings of Judah come in and
by which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{20}
Tell them, `Hear Yahweh's word, you kings of Judah, all Judah, and all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates:
\bibleverse{21} Yahweh says, ``Be careful, and bear no burden on the
Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{22}
Don't carry a burden out of your houses on the Sabbath day. Don't do any
work, but make the Sabbath day holy, as I commanded your fathers.
\bibleverse{23} But they didn't listen. They didn't turn their ear, but
made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, and might not receive
instruction. \bibleverse{24} It will happen, if you diligently listen to
me,'' says Yahweh, ``to bring in no burden through the gates of this
city on the Sabbath day, but to make the Sabbath day holy, to do no work
therein; \bibleverse{25} then there will enter in by the gates of this
city kings and princes sitting on David's throne, riding in chariots and
on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem; and this city will remain forever. \bibleverse{26} They
will come from the cities of Judah, and from the places around
Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, from the lowland, from the hill
country, and from the South, bringing burnt offerings, sacrifices, meal
offerings, and frankincense, and bringing sacrifices of thanksgiving to
Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{27} But if you will not listen to me to make
the Sabbath day holy, and not to bear a burden and enter in at the gates
of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in its gates,
and it will devour the palaces of Jerusalem. It will not be
quenched.''\,'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-obra-del-alfarero-como-suxedmbolo-del-dominio-divino-sobre-el-destino-de-los-pueblos}{%
\subsection{La obra del alfarero como símbolo del dominio divino sobre
el destino de los
pueblos}\label{la-obra-del-alfarero-como-suxedmbolo-del-dominio-divino-sobre-el-destino-de-los-pueblos}}

\hypertarget{section-34}{%
\section{18}\label{section-34}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yahvé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{2} ``Levántate y baja a la casa del alfarero, y allí te haré
escuchar mis palabras.''

\bibleverse{3} Entonces bajé a la casa del alfarero, y he aquí que
estaba haciendo algo en las ruedas. \bibleverse{4} Cuando la vasija que
había hecho de barro se estropeó en la mano del alfarero, éste volvió a
hacer otra vasija, según le pareció al alfarero hacerla.

\bibleverse{5} Entonces vino a mí la palabra de Yahvé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{6} ``Casa de Israel, ¿no puedo hacer con vosotros como este
alfarero?'', dice Yahvé. ``He aquí que como el barro en la mano del
alfarero, así sois vosotros en mi mano, casa de Israel. \footnote{\textbf{18:6}
  Is 45,9; Rom 9,21} \bibleverse{7} En el momento en que yo hable de una
nación y de un reino para arrancarlo, derribarlo y destruirlo,
\footnote{\textbf{18:7} Jer 1,10} \bibleverse{8} si esa nación, de la
que he hablado, se convierte de su maldad, me arrepentiré del mal que
pensaba hacerles. \footnote{\textbf{18:8} Jer 26,3; Jer 26,19; Jon 3,10}
\bibleverse{9} En el momento en que hable sobre una nación y sobre un
reino para construirlo y plantarlo, \bibleverse{10} si hacen lo que es
malo a mis ojos, que no obedecen mi voz, entonces me arrepentiré del
bien con el que dije que los beneficiaría.

\bibleverse{11} ``Ahora, pues, hablen a los hombres de Judá y a los
habitantes de Jerusalén, diciendo: ``El Señor dice: ``He aquí que yo
trazo el mal contra ustedes, y que concibo un plan contra ustedes.
Vuélvanse ahora todos de su mal camino, y enmienden sus caminos y sus
obras''. \footnote{\textbf{18:11} Jer 25,5; Jer 7,3} \bibleverse{12}
Pero ellos dicen: `Es en vano, porque caminaremos según nuestros propios
planes, y cada uno seguirá la terquedad de su malvado corazón'.''
\footnote{\textbf{18:12} Jer 6,16; Jer 3,17}

\hypertarget{la-apostasuxeda-del-pueblo-es-incomprensible-y-antinatural}{%
\subsection{La apostasía del pueblo es incomprensible y
antinatural}\label{la-apostasuxeda-del-pueblo-es-incomprensible-y-antinatural}}

\bibleverse{13} Por eso dice Yahvé: ``Pregunta ahora entre las naciones,
``¿Quién ha oído esas cosas? La virgen de Israel ha hecho algo muy
horrible. \bibleverse{14} ¿Fallará la nieve del Líbano de la roca del
campo? ¿Se secarán las aguas frías que bajan de lejos? \bibleverse{15}
Porque mi pueblo me ha olvidado. Han quemado incienso a dioses falsos.
Se les ha hecho tropezar en sus caminosen los antiguos caminos, para
caminar por los senderos, por un camino no construido, \bibleverse{16}
para hacer de su tierra un asombro, y un silbido perpetuo. Todos los que
pasen por allí se quedarán asombrados, y sacudir la cabeza.
\bibleverse{17} Los dispersaré como con un viento del este ante el
enemigo. Les mostraré la espalda, y no la cara, en el día de su
calamidad. \footnote{\textbf{18:17} Jer 2,27}

\hypertarget{ataques-hostiles-de-sacerdotes-y-profetas-impenitentes-contra-jeremuxedas-oraciuxf3n-de-venganza-del-profeta}{%
\subsection{Ataques hostiles de sacerdotes y profetas impenitentes
contra Jeremías; Oración de venganza del
profeta}\label{ataques-hostiles-de-sacerdotes-y-profetas-impenitentes-contra-jeremuxedas-oraciuxf3n-de-venganza-del-profeta}}

\bibleverse{18} Entonces dijeron: ``¡Vengan! Ideemos planes contra
Jeremías; porque la ley no perecerá del sacerdote, ni el consejo del
sabio, ni la palabra del profeta. Venid, y golpeémosle con la lengua, y
no prestemos atención a ninguna de sus palabras''. \bibleverse{19}
Escúchame, Yahvé, y escucha la voz de los que contienden conmigo.
\bibleverse{20} ¿Hay que recompensar el mal por el bien? Porque han
cavado una fosa para mi alma. Recuerda cómo me presenté ante ti para
hablar bien de ellos, para alejar de ellos tu ira. \footnote{\textbf{18:20}
  Sal 35,7} \bibleverse{21} Por lo tanto, entreguen a sus hijos al
hambre, y entregarlos al poder de la espada. Que sus esposas se queden
sin hijos y viudas. Que sus hombres sean asesinadosy sus jóvenes heridos
por la espada en la batalla. \bibleverse{22} Que se oiga un grito desde
sus casascuando traes una tropa de repente sobre ellos; porque han
cavado una fosa para llevarmey trampas ocultas para mis pies.
\bibleverse{23} Sin embargo, Yahvé, tú conoces todo su consejo contra mí
para matarme. No perdones su iniquidad. No borres su pecado de tu vista,
Que sean derribados ante ti. Trata con ellos en el momento de tu ira.
\footnote{\textbf{18:23} Sal 109,14-15}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-work-of-the-potter-as-a-symbol-of-divine-dominion-over-the-destiny-of-peoples}{%
\subsection{The work of the potter as a symbol of divine dominion over
the destiny of
peoples}\label{the-work-of-the-potter-as-a-symbol-of-divine-dominion-over-the-destiny-of-peoples}}

\hypertarget{section-35}{%
\section{18}\label{section-35}}

\bibleverse{1} The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I
will cause you to hear my words.'' \bibleverse{3} Then I went down to
the potter's house, and behold, he was making something on the wheels.
\bibleverse{4} When the vessel that he made of the clay was marred in
the hand of the potter, he made it again another vessel, as seemed good
to the potter to make it. \bibleverse{5} Then Yahweh's word came to me,
saying, \bibleverse{6} ``House of Israel, can't I do with you as this
potter?'' says Yahweh. ``Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so
are you in my hand, house of Israel. \bibleverse{7} At the instant I
speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to
break down and to destroy it, \bibleverse{8} if that nation, concerning
which I have spoken, turns from their evil, I will repent of the evil
that I thought to do to them. \bibleverse{9} At the instant I speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it,
\bibleverse{10} if they do that which is evil in my sight, that they not
obey my voice, then I will repent of the good with which I said I would
benefit them. \bibleverse{11} ``Now therefore, speak to the men of
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, `Yahweh says:
``Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a plan against you.
Everyone return from his evil way now, and amend your ways and your
doings.''\,' \bibleverse{12} But they say, `It is in vain; for we will
walk after our own plans, and we will each follow the stubbornness of
his evil heart.'\,''

\hypertarget{the-apostasy-of-the-people-is-incomprehensible-and-unnatural}{%
\subsection{The apostasy of the people is incomprehensible and
unnatural}\label{the-apostasy-of-the-people-is-incomprehensible-and-unnatural}}

\bibleverse{13} Therefore Yahweh says: ``Ask now among the nations, `Who
has heard such things?' The virgin of Israel has done a very horrible
thing. \bibleverse{14} Will the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of
the field? Will the cold waters that flow down from afar be dried up?
\bibleverse{15} For my people have forgotten me. They have burned
incense to false gods. They have been made to stumble in their ways in
the ancient paths, to walk in byways, in a way not built up,
\bibleverse{16} to make their land an astonishment, and a perpetual
hissing. Everyone who passes by it will be astonished, and shake his
head. \bibleverse{17} I will scatter them as with an east wind before
the enemy. I will show them the back, and not the face, in the day of
their calamity.

\hypertarget{hostile-attacks-by-unrepentant-priests-and-prophets-against-jeremiah-prophets-vengeance-prayer}{%
\subsection{Hostile attacks by unrepentant priests and prophets against
Jeremiah; Prophet's Vengeance
Prayer}\label{hostile-attacks-by-unrepentant-priests-and-prophets-against-jeremiah-prophets-vengeance-prayer}}

\bibleverse{18} Then they said, ``Come! Let's devise plans against
Jeremiah; for the law won't perish from the priest, nor counsel from the
wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let's strike him with the
tongue, and let's not give heed to any of his words.'' \bibleverse{19}
Give heed to me, Yahweh, and listen to the voice of those who contend
with me. \bibleverse{20} Should evil be recompensed for good? For they
have dug a pit for my soul. Remember how I stood before you to speak
good for them, to turn away your wrath from them. \bibleverse{21}
Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and give them over to
the power of the sword. Let their wives become childless and widows. Let
their men be killed and their young men struck by the sword in battle.
\bibleverse{22} Let a cry be heard from their houses when you bring a
troop suddenly on them; for they have dug a pit to take me and hidden
snares for my feet. \bibleverse{23} Yet, Yahweh, you know all their
counsel against me to kill me. Don't forgive their iniquity. Don't blot
out their sin from your sight, Let them be overthrown before you. Deal
with them in the time of your anger.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-abominaciuxf3n-de-thopheth-la-destrucciuxf3n-de-juduxe1-simbuxf3licamente-anunciada-por-el-rompimiento-de-una-jarra}{%
\subsection{La abominación de Thopheth; la destrucción de Judá
simbólicamente anunciada por el rompimiento de una
jarra}\label{la-abominaciuxf3n-de-thopheth-la-destrucciuxf3n-de-juduxe1-simbuxf3licamente-anunciada-por-el-rompimiento-de-una-jarra}}

\hypertarget{section-36}{%
\section{19}\label{section-36}}

\bibleverse{1} Así dijo Yahvé: ``Ve y compra un recipiente de barro de
alfarero, y toma a algunos de los ancianos del pueblo y de los ancianos
de los sacerdotes; \bibleverse{2} y sal al valle del hijo de Hinom, que
está junto a la entrada de la puerta de Harsit, y proclama allí las
palabras que yo te diré. \footnote{\textbf{19:2} Jer 19,11; Jer 7,31}
\bibleverse{3} Digan: ``Escuchen la palabra de Yavé, reyes de Judá y
habitantes de Jerusalén: Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel,
dice: ``He aquí que yo traigo el mal sobre este lugar, que a quien lo
oiga le hormiguearán los oídos. \footnote{\textbf{19:3} 1Sam 3,11; 2Re
  21,12} \bibleverse{4} Porque me han abandonado y han profanado este
lugar, y han quemado en él incienso a otros dioses que no conocían ---
ellos, sus padres y los reyes de Judá --- y han llenado este lugar con
sangre de inocentes, \bibleverse{5} y han construido los lugares altos
de Baal para quemar a sus hijos en el fuego para holocaustos a Baal, lo
cual yo no ordené, ni hablé, lo cual ni siquiera pasó por mi mente.
\footnote{\textbf{19:5} Jer 7,31-32} \bibleverse{6} Por tanto, he aquí
que vienen días --- dice el Señor --- en que este lugar no se llamará
más `Tofet', ni `Valle del hijo de Hinom', sino `Valle de la Matanza'.

\bibleverse{7} ``\,`\,``Anularé el consejo de Judá y de Jerusalén en
este lugar. Haré que caigan por la espada ante sus enemigos, y por la
mano de los que buscan su vida. Daré sus cadáveres para que sean
alimento de las aves del cielo y de los animales de la tierra.
\footnote{\textbf{19:7} Jer 7,33} \bibleverse{8} Haré de esta ciudad un
asombro y un silbido. Todo el que pase por ella se asombrará y silbará a
causa de todas sus plagas. \footnote{\textbf{19:8} Jer 18,16}
\bibleverse{9} Les haré comer la carne de sus hijos y la carne de sus
hijas. Cada uno comerá la carne de su amigo en el asedio y en la
angustia con que los angustiarán sus enemigos y los que buscan su
vida''. \footnote{\textbf{19:9} Deut 28,53}

\bibleverse{10} ``Entonces romperás el recipiente a la vista de los
hombres que van contigo, \bibleverse{11} y les dirás: ``El Señor de los
Ejércitos dice: ``Así romperé a este pueblo y a esta ciudad como se
rompe una vasija de alfarero, que no se puede volver a hacer. Los
enterrarán en Tofet hasta que no haya lugar para enterrarlos.
\footnote{\textbf{19:11} Is 30,14; Jer 7,32} \bibleverse{12} Esto es lo
que haré con este lugar --- dice el Señor --- y con sus habitantes,
haciendo que esta ciudad sea como Tofet. \bibleverse{13} Las casas de
Jerusalén y las casas de los reyes de Judá, que han sido profanadas,
serán como el lugar de Tofet, todas las casas en cuyos tejados han
quemado incienso a todo el ejército del cielo y han derramado libaciones
a otros dioses''\,''. \footnote{\textbf{19:13} Jer 32,29; Sof 1,5}

\hypertarget{el-discurso-de-jeremuxedas-ante-el-pueblo-en-el-patio-del-templo-su-maltrato-por-parte-del-coronel-del-templo-pashur}{%
\subsection{El discurso de Jeremías ante el pueblo en el patio del
templo; su maltrato por parte del coronel del templo
Pashur}\label{el-discurso-de-jeremuxedas-ante-el-pueblo-en-el-patio-del-templo-su-maltrato-por-parte-del-coronel-del-templo-pashur}}

\bibleverse{14} Entonces Jeremías vino de Tofet, donde Yahvé lo había
enviado a profetizar, y se puso de pie en el atrio de la casa de Yahvé,
y dijo a todo el pueblo: \bibleverse{15} ``Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el
Dios de Israel, dice: `He aquí que yo traigo sobre esta ciudad y sobre
todas sus villas todo el mal que he pronunciado contra ella, porque han
endurecido su cerviz para no oír mis palabras'.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-abomination-of-thopheth-the-destruction-of-judah-symbolically-foreshadowed-by-the-breaking-of-a-jar}{%
\subsection{The abomination of Thopheth; the destruction of Judah
symbolically foreshadowed by the breaking of a
jar}\label{the-abomination-of-thopheth-the-destruction-of-judah-symbolically-foreshadowed-by-the-breaking-of-a-jar}}

\hypertarget{section-37}{%
\section{19}\label{section-37}}

\bibleverse{1} Thus said Yahweh, ``Go, and buy a potter's earthen
container, and take some of the elders of the people and of the elders
of the priests; \bibleverse{2} and go out to the valley of the son of
Hinnom, which is by the entry of the gate Harsith, and proclaim there
the words that I will tell you. \bibleverse{3} Say, `Hear Yahweh's word,
kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel says, ``Behold, I will bring evil on this place, which whoever
hears, his ears will tingle. \bibleverse{4} Because they have forsaken
me, and have defiled this place, and have burned incense in it to other
gods that they didn't know---they, their fathers, and the kings of
Judah---and have filled this place with the blood of innocents,
\bibleverse{5} and have built the high places of Baal to burn their
children in the fire for burnt offerings to Baal, which I didn't
command, nor speak, which didn't even enter into my mind. \bibleverse{6}
Therefore, behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that this place will
no more be called `Topheth', nor `The Valley of the son of Hinnom', but
`The valley of Slaughter'. \bibleverse{7} ``\,`\,``I will make the
counsel of Judah and Jerusalem void in this place. I will cause them to
fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of those who
seek their life. I will give their dead bodies to be food for the birds
of the sky and for the animals of the earth. \bibleverse{8} I will make
this city an astonishment and a hissing. Everyone who passes by it will
be astonished and hiss because of all its plagues. \bibleverse{9} I will
cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their
daughters. They will each eat the flesh of his friend in the siege and
in the distress with which their enemies, and those who seek their life,
will distress them.''\,' \bibleverse{10} ``Then you shall break the
container in the sight of the men who go with you, \bibleverse{11} and
shall tell them, `Yahweh of Armies says: ``Even so I will break this
people and this city as one breaks a potter's vessel, that can't be made
whole again. They will bury in Topheth until there is no place to bury.
\bibleverse{12} This is what I will do to this place,'' says Yahweh,
``and to its inhabitants, even making this city as Topheth.
\bibleverse{13} The houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of
Judah, which are defiled, will be as the place of Topheth, even all the
houses on whose roofs they have burned incense to all the army of the
sky and have poured out drink offerings to other gods.''\,'\,''

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-speech-before-the-people-in-the-temple-court-his-mistreatment-by-the-temple-colonel-pashur}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's speech before the people in the temple court; his
mistreatment by the temple colonel
Pashur}\label{jeremiahs-speech-before-the-people-in-the-temple-court-his-mistreatment-by-the-temple-colonel-pashur}}

\bibleverse{14} Then Jeremiah came from Topheth, where Yahweh had sent
him to prophesy, and he stood in the court of Yahweh's house, and said
to all the people: \bibleverse{15} ``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel
says, `Behold, I will bring on this city and on all its towns all the
evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have made their
neck stiff, that they may not hear my words.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-38}{%
\section{20}\label{section-38}}

\bibleverse{1} Pashur, hijo del sacerdote Immer, que era el jefe de la
casa de Yavé, oyó a Jeremías profetizar estas cosas. \bibleverse{2}
Entonces Pasjur golpeó al profeta Jeremías y lo puso en el cepo que
estaba en la puerta superior de Benjamín, que estaba en la casa de Yavé.
\bibleverse{3} Al día siguiente, Pasjur liberó a Jeremías del cepo.
Entonces Jeremías le dijo: ``Yahvé no ha llamado tu nombre Pashur, sino
Magormissabib. \footnote{\textbf{20:3} ``Magormissabib'' significa
  ``rodeado de terror''} \bibleverse{4} Porque Yahvé dice: `He aquí que
te convertiré en un terror para ti y para todos tus amigos. Caerán por
la espada de sus enemigos, y tus ojos lo verán. Entregaré a todo Judá en
manos del rey de Babilonia, y él los llevará cautivos a Babilonia, y los
matará a espada. \bibleverse{5} Además, entregaré todas las riquezas de
esta ciudad, todas sus ganancias y todos sus objetos preciosos, sí,
entregaré todos los tesoros de los reyes de Judá en manos de sus
enemigos. Los harán cautivos, los tomarán y los llevarán a Babilonia.
\footnote{\textbf{20:5} Is 39,6} \bibleverse{6} Tú, Pashur, y todos los
que habitan en tu casa irán al cautiverio. Llegarás a Babilonia, y allí
morirás, y allí serás enterrado, tú y todos tus amigos, a quienes has
profetizado falsamente''.

\hypertarget{el-amargo-lamento-del-profeta-por-los-sufrimientos-de-su-profesiuxf3n-sus-luchas-internas-y-su-consuelo}{%
\subsection{El amargo lamento del profeta por los sufrimientos de su
profesión; sus luchas internas y su
consuelo}\label{el-amargo-lamento-del-profeta-por-los-sufrimientos-de-su-profesiuxf3n-sus-luchas-internas-y-su-consuelo}}

\bibleverse{7} Yahvé, tú me has persuadido, y yo he sido persuadido.
Eres más fuerte que yo y has vencido. Me he convertido en un hazmerreír
todo el día. Todo el mundo se burla de mí. \footnote{\textbf{20:7} Jer
  1,7} \bibleverse{8} Porque todas las veces que hablo, grito; Grito:
``¡Violencia y destrucción!''porque la palabra de Yahvé se ha convertido
en un reproche para mí, y una burla, todo el día. \footnote{\textbf{20:8}
  Is 49,4} \bibleverse{9} Si digo que no voy a hacer mención de él, ni
hablar más en su nombre, entonces hay en mi corazón como un fuego
ardiente encerrado en mis huesos. Estoy cansado de aguantar. No puedo.
\bibleverse{10} Porque he oído la difamación de muchos: ``¡Terror por
todos lados! Denuncia, y lo denunciaremos''. dicen todos mis amigos
conocidos, los que velan por mi caída. ``Tal vez se le convenza, y
prevaleceremos contra él, y nos vengaremos de él''. \footnote{\textbf{20:10}
  Sal 31,13} \bibleverse{11} Pero Yahvé está conmigo como un poderoso
imponente. Por eso mis perseguidores tropezarán, y no prevalecerán.
Estarán totalmente decepcionadosporque no han tratado con sabiduría,
incluso con un deshonor eterno que nunca será olvidado. \footnote{\textbf{20:11}
  Jer 1,8; Jer 1,19; Jer 15,20} \bibleverse{12} Pero el Señor de los
Ejércitos, que pone a prueba a los justos, que ve el corazón y la mente,
déjame ver tu venganza sobre ellos, porque te he revelado mi causa.
\footnote{\textbf{20:12} Jer 11,20} \bibleverse{13} ¡Canta a Yahvé!
Alabado sea Yahvé, porque ha librado el alma del necesitado de la mano
de los malhechores.

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-maldice-su-vida}{%
\subsection{Jeremías maldice su
vida}\label{jeremuxedas-maldice-su-vida}}

\bibleverse{14} Maldito sea el día en que nací. No permitas que el día
en que mi madre me dio a luz sea bendecido. \footnote{\textbf{20:14} Jer
  15,10; Job 3,1-10; Job 10,18} \bibleverse{15} Maldito sea el hombre
que trajo noticias a mi padre, diciendo, ``Te ha nacido un niño'', lo
que le alegró mucho. \bibleverse{16} Que ese hombre sea como las
ciudades que Yahvé derribó, y no se arrepintió. Que oiga un grito por la
mañana, y gritando al mediodía, \footnote{\textbf{20:16} Gén 19,24-25}
\bibleverse{17} porque no me mató desde el vientre. Así que mi madre
habría sido mi tumba, y su vientre siempre grande. \bibleverse{18} ¿Por
qué salí del vientre materno para ver el parto y el dolor? que mis días
se consuman en la vergüenza?

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-39}{%
\section{20}\label{section-39}}

\bibleverse{1} Now Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest, who was chief
officer in Yahweh's house, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things.
\bibleverse{2} Then Pashhur struck Jeremiah the prophet and put him in
the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which was in
Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{3} On the next day, Pashhur released
Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then Jeremiah said to him, ``Yahweh has not
called your name Pashhur, but Magormissabib.\footnote{\textbf{20:3}
  ``Magormissabib'' means ``surrounded by terror''} \bibleverse{4} For
Yahweh says, `Behold, I will make you a terror to yourself and to all
your friends. They will fall by the sword of their enemies, and your
eyes will see it. I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he will carry them captive to Babylon, and will kill them
with the sword. \bibleverse{5} Moreover I will give all the riches of
this city, and all its gains, and all its precious things, yes, I will
give all the treasures of the kings of Judah into the hand of their
enemies. They will make them captives, take them, and carry them to
Babylon. \bibleverse{6} You, Pashhur, and all who dwell in your house
will go into captivity. You will come to Babylon, and there you will
die, and there you will be buried, you, and all your friends, to whom
you have prophesied falsely.'\,''

\hypertarget{the-bitter-lament-of-the-prophet-for-the-sufferings-of-his-profession-their-inner-struggles-and-their-consolation}{%
\subsection{The bitter lament of the prophet for the sufferings of his
profession; their inner struggles and their
consolation}\label{the-bitter-lament-of-the-prophet-for-the-sufferings-of-his-profession-their-inner-struggles-and-their-consolation}}

\bibleverse{7} Yahweh, you have persuaded me, and I was persuaded. You
are stronger than I, and have prevailed. I have become a laughingstock
all day. Everyone mocks me. \bibleverse{8} For as often as I speak, I
cry out; I cry, ``Violence and destruction!'' because Yahweh's word has
been made a reproach to me, and a derision, all day. \bibleverse{9} If I
say that I will not make mention of him, or speak any more in his name,
then there is in my heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones.
I am weary with holding it in. I can't. \bibleverse{10} For I have heard
the defaming of many: ``Terror on every side! Denounce, and we will
denounce him!'' say all my familiar friends, those who watch for my
fall. ``Perhaps he will be persuaded, and we will prevail against him,
and we will take our revenge on him.'' \bibleverse{11} But Yahweh is
with me as an awesome mighty one. Therefore my persecutors will stumble,
and they won't prevail. They will be utterly disappointed because they
have not dealt wisely, even with an everlasting dishonor which will
never be forgotten. \bibleverse{12} But Yahweh of Armies, who tests the
righteous, who sees the heart and the mind, let me see your vengeance on
them, for I have revealed my cause to you. \bibleverse{13} Sing to
Yahweh! Praise Yahweh, for he has delivered the soul of the needy from
the hand of evildoers.

\hypertarget{jeremiah-curses-his-life}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah curses his life}\label{jeremiah-curses-his-life}}

\bibleverse{14} Cursed is the day in which I was born. Don't let the day
in which my mother bore me be blessed. \bibleverse{15} Cursed is the man
who brought news to my father, saying, ``A boy is born to you,'' making
him very glad. \bibleverse{16} Let that man be as the cities which
Yahweh overthrew, and didn't repent. Let him hear a cry in the morning,
and shouting at noontime, \bibleverse{17} because he didn't kill me from
the womb. So my mother would have been my grave, and her womb always
great. \bibleverse{18} Why did I come out of the womb to see labor and
sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{unheilvolle-antwort-jeremias-an-zedekias-gesandte-und-mahnungen-an-das-volk-wuxe4hrend-der-belagerung-jerusalems}{%
\subsection{Unheilvolle Antwort Jeremias an Zedekias Gesandte und
Mahnungen an das Volk während der Belagerung
Jerusalems}\label{unheilvolle-antwort-jeremias-an-zedekias-gesandte-und-mahnungen-an-das-volk-wuxe4hrend-der-belagerung-jerusalems}}

\hypertarget{section-40}{%
\section{21}\label{section-40}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé, cuando el
rey Sedequías le envió a Pashur, hijo de Malquías, y a Sofonías, hijo de
Maasías, el sacerdote, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{21:1} Jer 29,25}
\bibleverse{2} ``Por favor, consulta a Yavé por nosotros, porque
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, nos hace la guerra. Tal vez Yahvé nos
trate según todas sus maravillas, para que se retire de nosotros''.

\bibleverse{3} Entonces Jeremías les dijo: ``Dile a Sedequías
\bibleverse{4} `Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``He aquí que yo haré
retroceder las armas de guerra que están en tus manos, con las que
luchas contra el rey de Babilonia, y contra los caldeos que te asedian
fuera de las murallas; y los reuniré en medio de esta ciudad.
\bibleverse{5} Yo mismo lucharé contra ti con mano extendida y con brazo
fuerte, con ira, con enojo y con gran indignación. \bibleverse{6}
Golpearé a los habitantes de esta ciudad, tanto a los hombres como a los
animales. Morirán de una gran peste. \bibleverse{7} Después --- dice el
Señor --- libraré a Sedequías, rey de Judá, a sus siervos y al pueblo, a
los que queden en esta ciudad, de la peste, de la espada y del hambre,
en manos de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, en manos de sus enemigos y
en manos de los que buscan su vida. Los golpeará con el filo de la
espada. No los perdonará, ni se apiadará, ni tendrá piedad''.

\hypertarget{asesoramiento-a-la-gente}{%
\subsection{Asesoramiento a la gente}\label{asesoramiento-a-la-gente}}

\bibleverse{8} ``Dirás a este pueblo: `Dice el Señor: ``He aquí que
pongo ante ti el camino de la vida y el camino de la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{21:8}
  Deut 11,26} \bibleverse{9} El que se quede en esta ciudad morirá por
la espada, por el hambre y por la peste, pero el que salga y pase a los
caldeos que te asedian, vivirá y escapará con vida. \footnote{\textbf{21:9}
  Jer 38,2} \bibleverse{10} Porque he puesto mi rostro sobre esta ciudad
para mal y no para bien'', dice el Señor. ``Será entregada en manos del
rey de Babilonia, y él la quemará con fuego''.

\hypertarget{advertencia-a-la-familia-real}{%
\subsection{Advertencia a la familia
real}\label{advertencia-a-la-familia-real}}

\bibleverse{11} ``En cuanto a la casa del rey de Judá, escucha la
palabra de Yahvé: \bibleverse{12} Casa de David, dice Yahvé,`Ejecutar la
justicia por la mañana, y libera al que es robado de la mano del
opresor, para que mi ira no se apague como el fuego, y arderá de manera
que nadie pueda apagarlo, por la maldad de tus actos. \footnote{\textbf{21:12}
  Jer 22,3; Jer 7,20}

\hypertarget{anuncio-de-sentencia-para-la-ciudad-de-jerusaluxe9n}{%
\subsection{Anuncio de sentencia para la ciudad de
Jerusalén}\label{anuncio-de-sentencia-para-la-ciudad-de-jerusaluxe9n}}

\bibleverse{13} He aquí que estoy contra ti, oh habitante del valle, y
de la roca de la llanura', dice Yahvé. Los que decís: ``¿Quién bajará
contra nosotros?''o, ``¿Quién entraría en nuestras casas?''
\bibleverse{14} Te castigaré según el fruto de tus obras, dice Yahvé; y
encenderé un fuego en su bosque, y devorará todo lo que la rodea''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{unheilvolle-antwort-jeremias-an-zedekias-gesandte-und-mahnungen-an-das-volk-wuxe4hrend-der-belagerung-jerusalems-1}{%
\subsection{Unheilvolle Antwort Jeremias an Zedekias Gesandte und
Mahnungen an das Volk während der Belagerung
Jerusalems}\label{unheilvolle-antwort-jeremias-an-zedekias-gesandte-und-mahnungen-an-das-volk-wuxe4hrend-der-belagerung-jerusalems-1}}

\hypertarget{section-41}{%
\section{21}\label{section-41}}

\bibleverse{1} The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, when King
Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur the son of Malchijah, and Zephaniah the son
of Maaseiah, the priest, saying, \bibleverse{2} ``Please inquire of
Yahweh for us; for Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon makes war against us.
Perhaps Yahweh will deal with us according to all his wondrous works,
that he may withdraw from us.'' \bibleverse{3} Then Jeremiah said to
them, ``Tell Zedekiah: \bibleverse{4} `Yahweh, the God of Israel says,
``Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands,
with which you fight against the king of Babylon, and against the
Chaldeans who besiege you outside the walls; and I will gather them into
the middle of this city. \bibleverse{5} I myself will fight against you
with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, in
wrath, and in great indignation. \bibleverse{6} I will strike the
inhabitants of this city, both man and animal. They will die of a great
pestilence. \bibleverse{7} Afterward,'' says Yahweh, ``I will deliver
Zedekiah king of Judah, his servants, and the people, even those who are
left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the
famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the
hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life.
He will strike them with the edge of the sword. He will not spare them,
have pity, or have mercy.''\,'

\hypertarget{advice-to-people}{%
\subsection{Advice to people}\label{advice-to-people}}

\bibleverse{8} ``You shall say to this people, `Yahweh says: ``Behold, I
set before you the way of life and the way of death. \bibleverse{9} He
who remains in this city will die by the sword, by the famine, and by
the pestilence, but he who goes out and passes over to the Chaldeans who
besiege you, he will live, and he will escape with his life.
\bibleverse{10} For I have set my face on this city for evil, and not
for good,'' says Yahweh. ``It will be given into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.''\,'

\hypertarget{warning-to-the-royal-family}{%
\subsection{Warning to the royal
family}\label{warning-to-the-royal-family}}

\bibleverse{11} ``Concerning the house of the king of Judah, hear
Yahweh's word: \bibleverse{12} House of David, Yahweh says, `Execute
justice in the morning, and deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of
the oppressor, lest my wrath go out like fire, and burn so that no one
can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

\hypertarget{judgment-announcement-for-the-city-of-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Judgment announcement for the city of
Jerusalem}\label{judgment-announcement-for-the-city-of-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{13} Behold, I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,
and of the rock of the plain,' says Yahweh. `You that say, ``Who would
come down against us?'' or, ``Who would enter into our homes?''
\bibleverse{14} I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings,
says Yahweh; and I will kindle a fire in her forest, and it will devour
all that is around her.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{advertencia-a-la-casa-real-de-juduxe1-anuncio-del-juicio-sobre-los-reyes-salum-joacaz-y-joacim}{%
\subsection{Advertencia a la casa real de Judá; Anuncio del juicio sobre
los reyes Salum (Joacaz) y
Joacim}\label{advertencia-a-la-casa-real-de-juduxe1-anuncio-del-juicio-sobre-los-reyes-salum-joacaz-y-joacim}}

\hypertarget{section-42}{%
\section{22}\label{section-42}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahvé dijo: ``Baja a la casa del rey de Judá y di allí
esta palabra: \bibleverse{2} `Escucha la palabra de Yavé, rey de Judá,
que se sienta en el trono de David: tú, tus siervos y tu pueblo que
entran por estas puertas. \bibleverse{3} Yahvé dice: ``Ejecuta el
derecho y la justicia, y libera al despojado de la mano del opresor. No
hagas ningún mal. No hagas violencia al extranjero, al huérfano o a la
viuda. No derrames sangre inocente en este lugar. \footnote{\textbf{22:3}
  Jer 21,12} \bibleverse{4} Porque si hacéis esto, los reyes que se
sientan en el trono de David entrarán por las puertas de esta casa,
montados en carros y en caballos: ellos, sus siervos y su pueblo.
\footnote{\textbf{22:4} Jer 17,25} \bibleverse{5} Pero si no escuchan
estas palabras, juro por mí mismo --- dice el Señor --- que esta casa se
convertirá en una desolación''.

\hypertarget{maldiciuxf3n-en-el-palacio-real}{%
\subsection{Maldición en el palacio
real}\label{maldiciuxf3n-en-el-palacio-real}}

\bibleverse{6} Porque Yahvé dice sobre la casa del rey de Judá: ``Tú
eres Gilead para mí, el jefe del Líbano. Sin embargo, ciertamente te
convertiré en un desierto, ciudades que no están habitadas.
\bibleverse{7} Prepararé destructores contra ti, todos con sus armas, y
cortarán sus cedros preferidos, y los echó al fuego.

\bibleverse{8} ``Muchas naciones pasarán por esta ciudad, y cada una de
ellas preguntará a su vecino: ``¿Por qué ha hecho esto Yahvé a esta gran
ciudad?'' \bibleverse{9} Entonces responderán: ``Porque abandonaron la
alianza de Yahvé, su Dios, adoraron a otros dioses y les sirvieron.''

\hypertarget{unas-palabras-de-puxe9same-para-el-desafortunado-sallum-joacaz}{%
\subsection{Unas palabras de pésame para el desafortunado Sallum
(Joacaz)}\label{unas-palabras-de-puxe9same-para-el-desafortunado-sallum-joacaz}}

\bibleverse{10} No llores por los muertos. No lo lamentes; pero llora
amargamente por el que se va, porque no volverá más, y no ver su país
natal. \bibleverse{11} Porque el Señor dice tocando a Salum, hijo de
Josías, rey de Judá, que reinó en lugar de su padre Josías, y que salió
de este lugar ``No volverá más allí. \footnote{\textbf{22:11} 2Cró
  36,3-4} \bibleverse{12} Pero morirá en el lugar donde lo han llevado
cautivo. No volverá a ver esta tierra''.

\hypertarget{graves-acusaciones-y-amenazas-de-castigo-contra-el-rey-jojakim}{%
\subsection{Graves acusaciones y amenazas de castigo contra el rey
Jojakim}\label{graves-acusaciones-y-amenazas-de-castigo-contra-el-rey-jojakim}}

\bibleverse{13} ``Ay del que construye su casa con la injusticia, y sus
habitaciones por la injusticia; que utiliza el servicio de su vecino sin
cobrar, y no le da su alquiler; \footnote{\textbf{22:13} Miq 3,10; Lev
  19,13} \bibleverse{14} que dice: ``Voy a construirme una casa amplia y
habitaciones espaciosas''. y recorta las ventanas para sí mismo, con un
techo de cedro, y pintado de rojo. \bibleverse{15} ``¿Debes reinar
porque te esfuerzas por sobresalir en el cedro? ¿Tu padre no comía y
bebía? y hacer justicia y rectitud? Entonces le fue bien.
\bibleverse{16} Juzgó la causa de los pobres y necesitados; así que
entonces estaba bien. ¿No era esto para conocerme?''dice Yahvé.
\bibleverse{17} Pero tus ojos y tu corazón son sólo para tu codicia, por
derramar sangre inocente, para la opresión, y para hacer violencia''.
\bibleverse{18} Por lo tanto, Yahvé dice respecto a Joacim, hijo de
Josías, rey de Judá``No se lamentarán por él, diciendo: ``¡Ah, mi
hermano!'' o ``¡Ah, hermana! No se lamentarán por él, diciendo ``¡Ah
señor!'' o, ``¡Ah su gloria! \footnote{\textbf{22:18} Jer 34,5}
\bibleverse{19} Será enterrado con la sepultura de un burro, arrastrados
y expulsados más allá de las puertas de Jerusalén''. \footnote{\textbf{22:19}
  Is 14,19}

\hypertarget{proclamaciuxf3n-de-la-condenaciuxf3n-de-jerusaluxe9n-y-su-rey-joaquuxedn}{%
\subsection{Proclamación de la condenación de Jerusalén y su rey
Joaquín}\label{proclamaciuxf3n-de-la-condenaciuxf3n-de-jerusaluxe9n-y-su-rey-joaquuxedn}}

\bibleverse{20} ``Sube al Líbano y grita. Alza tu voz en Basán, y claman
desde Abarim; porque todos tus amantes han sido destruidos.
\bibleverse{21} Te hablé en tu prosperidad, pero tú dijiste: ``No voy a
escuchar''. Este ha sido tu camino desde tu juventud, que no obedeciste
mi voz. \bibleverse{22} El viento alimentará a todos tus pastores, y tus
amantes irán al cautiverio. Seguramente entonces te avergonzarásy
confundido por toda tu maldad. \footnote{\textbf{22:22} Jer 25,9; Jer
  25,18} \bibleverse{23} Habitante del Líbano, que hace su nido en los
cedros, que se compadecerá de ti cuando te lleguen los dolores, ¡el
dolor como el de una mujer de parto! \footnote{\textbf{22:23} Jer 13,21}

\hypertarget{tres-dichos-sobre-el-rey-conuxedas-joaquuxedn}{%
\subsection{Tres dichos sobre el rey Conías
(Joaquín)}\label{tres-dichos-sobre-el-rey-conuxedas-joaquuxedn}}

\bibleverse{24} ``Vivo yo --- dice el Señor --- que aunque Conías, hijo
de Joacim, rey de Judá, fuera el sello de mi mano derecha, te arrancaría
de allí. \footnote{\textbf{22:24} Jer 24,1} \bibleverse{25} Te
entregaría a la mano de los que buscan tu vida, y a la mano de los que
te dan miedo, a la mano de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, y a la mano
de los caldeos. \bibleverse{26} Te echaré con tu madre que te dio a luz
a otro país, donde no naciste, y allí morirás. \footnote{\textbf{22:26}
  2Re 24,12; 2Re 24,15} \bibleverse{27} Pero a la tierra a la que su
alma anhela regresar, allí no volverán''. \bibleverse{28} ¿Es este
hombre, Conías, un vaso roto y despreciado? ¿Es un recipiente en el que
nadie se deleita? Por qué son expulsados, él y su descendencia, y
arrojados a una tierra que no conocen? \bibleverse{29} Oh, tierra,
tierra, tierra, ¡escuchen la palabra de Yahvé! \bibleverse{30} Dice
Yahvé, ``Registra a este hombre como sin hijos, un hombre que no
prosperará en sus días; porque ya no prosperará el hombre de su
descendencia, sentado en el trono de Davidy gobernando en Judá''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{warning-to-the-royal-house-of-judah-announcement-of-the-judgment-on-kings-shallum-joahaz-and-jehoiakim}{%
\subsection{Warning to the royal house of Judah; Announcement of the
judgment on Kings Shallum (Joahaz) and
Jehoiakim}\label{warning-to-the-royal-house-of-judah-announcement-of-the-judgment-on-kings-shallum-joahaz-and-jehoiakim}}

\hypertarget{section-43}{%
\section{22}\label{section-43}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh said, ``Go down to the house of the king of Judah,
and speak this word there: \bibleverse{2} `Hear Yahweh's word, king of
Judah, who sits on David's throne---you, your servants, and your people
who enter in by these gates. \bibleverse{3} Yahweh says: ``Execute
justice and righteousness, and deliver him who is robbed out of the hand
of the oppressor. Do no wrong. Do no violence to the foreigner, the
fatherless, or the widow. Don't shed innocent blood in this place.
\bibleverse{4} For if you do this thing indeed, then kings sitting on
David's throne will enter in by the gates of this house, riding in
chariots and on horses---they, their servants, and their people.
\bibleverse{5} But if you will not hear these words, I swear by
myself,'' says Yahweh, ``that this house will become a
desolation.''\,'\,''

\hypertarget{curse-in-the-royal-palace}{%
\subsection{Curse in the royal palace}\label{curse-in-the-royal-palace}}

\bibleverse{6} For Yahweh says concerning the house of the king of
Judah: ``You are Gilead to me, the head of Lebanon. Yet surely I will
make you a wilderness, cities which are not inhabited. \bibleverse{7} I
will prepare destroyers against you, everyone with his weapons, and they
will cut down your choice cedars, and cast them into the fire.
\bibleverse{8} ``Many nations will pass by this city, and they will each
ask his neighbor, `Why has Yahweh done this to this great city?'
\bibleverse{9} Then they will answer, `Because they abandoned the
covenant of Yahweh their God, worshiped other gods, and served
them.'\,''

\hypertarget{a-word-of-condolences-to-the-unfortunate-sallum-joahaz}{%
\subsection{A word of condolences to the unfortunate Sallum
(Joahaz)}\label{a-word-of-condolences-to-the-unfortunate-sallum-joahaz}}

\bibleverse{10} Don't weep for the dead. Don't bemoan him; but weep
bitterly for him who goes away, for he will return no more, and not see
his native country. \bibleverse{11} For Yahweh says touching Shallum the
son of Josiah, king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his father,
and who went out of this place: ``He won't return there any more.
\bibleverse{12} But he will die in the place where they have led him
captive. He will see this land no more.''

\hypertarget{serious-accusations-and-threats-of-punishment-against-king-jojakim}{%
\subsection{Serious accusations and threats of punishment against King
Jojakim}\label{serious-accusations-and-threats-of-punishment-against-king-jojakim}}

\bibleverse{13} ``Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness,
and his rooms by injustice; who uses his neighbor's service without
wages, and doesn't give him his hire; \bibleverse{14} who says, `I will
build myself a wide house and spacious rooms,' and cuts out windows for
himself, with a cedar ceiling, and painted with red. \bibleverse{15}
``Should you reign because you strive to excel in cedar? Didn't your
father eat and drink, and do justice and righteousness? Then it was well
with him. \bibleverse{16} He judged the cause of the poor and needy; so
then it was well. Wasn't this to know me?'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{17}
But your eyes and your heart are only for your covetousness, for
shedding innocent blood, for oppression, and for doing violence.''
\bibleverse{18} Therefore Yahweh says concerning Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, king of Judah: ``They won't lament for him, saying, `Ah my
brother!' or, `Ah sister!' They won't lament for him, saying `Ah lord!'
or, `Ah his glory!' \bibleverse{19} He will be buried with the burial of
a donkey, drawn and cast out beyond the gates of Jerusalem.''

\hypertarget{proclamation-of-the-doom-of-jerusalem-and-its-king-joachim}{%
\subsection{Proclamation of the doom of Jerusalem and its king
Joachim}\label{proclamation-of-the-doom-of-jerusalem-and-its-king-joachim}}

\bibleverse{20} ``Go up to Lebanon, and cry out. Lift up your voice in
Bashan, and cry from Abarim; for all your lovers have been destroyed.
\bibleverse{21} I spoke to you in your prosperity, but you said, `I will
not listen.' This has been your way from your youth, that you didn't
obey my voice. \bibleverse{22} The wind will feed all your shepherds,
and your lovers will go into captivity. Surely then you will be ashamed
and confounded for all your wickedness. \bibleverse{23} Inhabitant of
Lebanon, who makes your nest in the cedars, how greatly to be pitied you
will be when pangs come on you, the pain as of a woman in travail!

\hypertarget{three-sayings-about-king-conias-joachim}{%
\subsection{Three sayings about King Conias
(Joachim)}\label{three-sayings-about-king-conias-joachim}}

\bibleverse{24} ``As I live,'' says Yahweh, ``though Coniah the son of
Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet on my right hand, I would still
pluck you from there. \bibleverse{25} I would give you into the hand of
those who seek your life, and into the hand of them of whom you are
afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into
the hand of the Chaldeans. \bibleverse{26} I will cast you out with your
mother who bore you into another country, where you were not born; and
there you will die. \bibleverse{27} But to the land to which their soul
longs to return, there they will not return.'' \bibleverse{28} Is this
man Coniah a despised broken vessel? Is he a vessel in which no one
delights? Why are they cast out, he and his offspring, and cast into a
land which they don't know? \bibleverse{29} O earth, earth, earth, hear
Yahweh's word! \bibleverse{30} Yahweh says, ``Record this man as
childless, a man who will not prosper in his days; for no more will a
man of his offspring prosper, sitting on David's throne and ruling in
Judah.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{ay-de-los-pastores-infieles-y-la-promesa-del-verdadero-pastor-de-la-casa-de-david}{%
\subsection{Ay de los pastores infieles y la promesa del verdadero
pastor de la casa de
David}\label{ay-de-los-pastores-infieles-y-la-promesa-del-verdadero-pastor-de-la-casa-de-david}}

\hypertarget{section-44}{%
\section{23}\label{section-44}}

\bibleverse{1} ``¡Ay de los pastores que destruyen y dispersan las
ovejas de mi prado!'', dice el Señor. \footnote{\textbf{23:1} Ezeq
  13,2-16; Ezeq 34,1-34; Zac 11,5} \bibleverse{2} Por eso Yahvé, el Dios
de Israel, dice contra los pastores que apacientan a mi pueblo ``Ustedes
han dispersado mi rebaño, lo han alejado y no lo han visitado. He aquí
que yo visitaré sobre ustedes el mal de sus acciones'', dice el Señor.
\bibleverse{3} ``Reuniré el remanente de mi rebaño de todas las tierras
a las que lo he expulsado, y lo devolveré a sus rebaños; y será fecundo
y se multiplicará. \bibleverse{4} Pondré sobre ellas pastores que las
apacienten. Ya no tendrán miedo ni se desanimarán, ni les faltará
nada'', dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{23:4} Jer 3,15}

\hypertarget{promesa-del-brote-de-david}{%
\subsection{Promesa del brote de
David}\label{promesa-del-brote-de-david}}

\bibleverse{5} ``He aquí que llegan los días'', dice Yahvé, ``que
levantaré a David una rama justa; y reinará como rey y tratará con
sabiduría, y hará justicia y rectitud en la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{23:5}
  Zac 3,8; Zac 6,12; Is 21,1} \bibleverse{6} En sus días Judá se
salvará, e Israel habitará con seguridad. Este es el nombre por el que
será llamado: Yahvé, nuestra justicia. \footnote{\textbf{23:6} Jer 33,16}
\bibleverse{7} ``Por tanto, he aquí que vienen días --- dice Yahvé ---
en que ya no dirán: ``Vive Yahvé, que sacó a los hijos de Israel de la
tierra de Egipto''; \footnote{\textbf{23:7} Jer 16,14-15} \bibleverse{8}
sino: ``Vive Yahvé, que sacó y condujo a la descendencia de la casa de
Israel de la tierra del norte y de todas las tierras a las que los había
expulsado''. Entonces habitarán en su propia tierra''.

\hypertarget{lamentar-la-corrupciuxf3n-y-depravaciuxf3n-general-de-los-luxedderes-espirituales}{%
\subsection{Lamentar la corrupción y depravación general de los líderes
espirituales}\label{lamentar-la-corrupciuxf3n-y-depravaciuxf3n-general-de-los-luxedderes-espirituales}}

\bibleverse{9} Con respecto a los profetas: Mi corazón está roto por
dentro. Todos mis huesos tiemblan. Soy como un borracho, y como un
hombre al que el vino ha vencido, a causa de Yahvé, y por sus santas
palabras. \bibleverse{10} ``Porque la tierra está llena de adúlteros;
porque a causa de la maldición la tierra está de luto. Los pastos del
desierto se han secado. Su curso es malvado, y su poderío no es
correcto; \bibleverse{11} pues tanto el profeta como el sacerdote son
profanos. Sí, en mi casa he encontrado su maldad'', dice Yahvé.
\bibleverse{12} Por eso su camino será para ellos como lugares
resbaladizos en la oscuridad. Serán conducidos, y caer en ella; porque
traeré el mal sobre ellos, hasta el año de su visita'', dice Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{23:12} Jer 13,16; Sal 35,6}

\hypertarget{dichos-sobre-los-falsos-profetas}{%
\subsection{Dichos sobre los falsos
profetas}\label{dichos-sobre-los-falsos-profetas}}

\bibleverse{13} ``He visto locura en los profetas de Samaria.
Profetizaron por Baal, y ha hecho errar a mi pueblo Israel.
\bibleverse{14} En los profetas de Jerusalén también he visto una cosa
horrible: cometen adulterio y andan en la mentira. Fortalecen las manos
de los malhechores, para que nadie vuelva de su maldad. Todos se han
vuelto para mí como Sodoma, y sus habitantes como Gomorra''. \footnote{\textbf{23:14}
  Ezeq 13,22; Is 1,10}

\bibleverse{15} Por lo tanto, el Señor de los Ejércitos dice sobre los
profetas: ``He aquí que los alimentaré con ajenjo, y hacerles beber agua
envenenada; porque de los profetas de Jerusalén ha salido la impiedad en
toda la tierra''. \footnote{\textbf{23:15} Jer 9,15}

\bibleverse{16} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice, ``No escuchéis las
palabras de los profetas que os profetizan. Te enseñan la vanidad.
Hablan una visión de su propio corazón, y no de la boca de Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{23:16} Jer 6,14} \bibleverse{17} Dicen continuamente a
los que me desprecian,`Yahvé ha dicho: ``Tendrás paz'';'y a todo aquel
que camina en la terquedad de su propio corazón le dicen,`Ningún mal
caerá sobre ti'. \footnote{\textbf{23:17} Jer 7,24} \bibleverse{18} Pues
quién ha estado en el consejo de Yahvé, para que perciba y escuche su
palabra? ¿Quién ha escuchado mi palabra y la ha oído? \footnote{\textbf{23:18}
  Is 40,13} \bibleverse{19} He aquí que la tormenta de Yahvé, su ira, ha
salido. ¡Sí, una tormenta de remolinos! Estallará en la cabeza de los
malvados. \footnote{\textbf{23:19} Jer 30,23} \bibleverse{20} La ira de
Yahvé no volverá hasta que haya ejecutadoy realizó las intenciones de su
corazón. En los últimos días, lo entenderás perfectamente.
\bibleverse{21} Yo no envié a estos profetas, y sin embargo corrieron.
No les hablé, y sin embargo profetizaron. \footnote{\textbf{23:21} Jer
  14,14} \bibleverse{22} Pero si hubieran estado en mi consejo, entonces
habrían hecho que mi pueblo escuchara mis palabras, y los habría alejado
de su mal camino, y de la maldad de sus actos. \bibleverse{23} ``Soy un
Dios cercano'', dice Yahvé, ``¿y no un Dios lejano? \bibleverse{24}
¿Puede alguien esconderse en lugares secretos¿para que no lo vea?'',
dice Yahvé. ``¿No lleno yo el cielo y la tierra?'', dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{advertencia-de-los-sueuxf1os-de-los-profetas-mentirosos}{%
\subsection{Advertencia de los sueños de los profetas
mentirosos}\label{advertencia-de-los-sueuxf1os-de-los-profetas-mentirosos}}

\bibleverse{25} ``He oído lo que han dicho los profetas, que profetizan
mentiras en mi nombre, diciendo: ``¡He tenido un sueño! He tenido un
sueño''. \bibleverse{26} ¿Hasta cuándo estará esto en el corazón de los
profetas que profetizan mentiras, los profetas del engaño de su propio
corazón? \bibleverse{27} Pretenden hacer que mi pueblo se olvide de mi
nombre con sus sueños que cada uno cuenta a su prójimo, como sus padres
se olvidaron de mi nombre por culpa de Baal. \bibleverse{28} El profeta
que tenga un sueño, que cuente un sueño; y el que tenga mi palabra, que
diga mi palabra con fidelidad. ¿Qué es la paja para el trigo?'', dice el
Señor. \bibleverse{29} ``¿No es mi palabra como el fuego?'', dice el
Señor, ``y como un martillo que rompe la roca en pedazos''. \footnote{\textbf{23:29}
  Heb 4,12}

\bibleverse{30} ``Por tanto, he aquí que estoy contra los profetas ---
dice el Señor --- que roban cada uno mis palabras a su prójimo.
\bibleverse{31} He aquí que yo estoy contra los profetas --- dice el
Señor --- que usan su lengua y dicen: ``Él dice''. \bibleverse{32} He
aquí que yo estoy contra los que profetizan sueños mentirosos --- dice
el Señor ---, que los cuentan y hacen errar a mi pueblo con sus mentiras
y con su vana jactancia; pero yo no los envié ni los mandé. No
aprovechan en absoluto a este pueblo'', dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{23:32}
  Jer 23,21}

\hypertarget{advertencia-contra-la-expresiuxf3n-incorrecta-carga-del-seuxf1or}{%
\subsection{Advertencia contra la expresión incorrecta ``carga del
Señor''}\label{advertencia-contra-la-expresiuxf3n-incorrecta-carga-del-seuxf1or}}

\bibleverse{33} ``Cuando este pueblo, o el profeta, o un sacerdote, te
pregunten diciendo: ``¿Cuál es el mensaje de Yahvé? Entonces les dirás:
`¿Qué mensaje? Te voy a expulsar'', dice el Señor. \bibleverse{34} En
cuanto al profeta, al sacerdote y al pueblo que digan: ``El mensaje de
Yahvé'', castigaré a ese hombre y a su familia. \bibleverse{35} Cada uno
dirá a su prójimo y cada uno a su hermano: ``¿Qué ha respondido Yahvé?''
y ``¿Qué ha dicho Yahvé?'' \bibleverse{36} No mencionaréis más el
mensaje de Yahvé, porque la palabra de cada uno se ha convertido en su
mensaje; porque habéis pervertido las palabras del Dios vivo, de Yahvé
de los Ejércitos, nuestro Dios. \bibleverse{37} Diréis al profeta:
``¿Qué te ha respondido Yahvé?'' y ``¿Qué ha dicho Yahvé?'
\bibleverse{38} Aunque digáis: `El mensaje de Yahvé', por eso Yahvé
dice: `Porque decís esta palabra: ``El mensaje de Yahvé'', y yo he
enviado a deciros que no digáis: ``El mensaje de Yahvé'',
\bibleverse{39} por lo tanto, he aquí que os olvidaré por completo, y os
echaré con la ciudad que os di a vosotros y a vuestros padres, lejos de
mi presencia. \bibleverse{40} traeré sobre ti un oprobio eterno, y una
vergüenza perpetua, que no será olvidada.'\,'' \footnote{\textbf{23:40}
  Jer 20,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{woe-to-the-unfaithful-shepherds-and-the-promise-of-the-true-shepherd-of-the-house-of-david}{%
\subsection{Woe to the unfaithful shepherds and the promise of the true
shepherd of the house of
David}\label{woe-to-the-unfaithful-shepherds-and-the-promise-of-the-true-shepherd-of-the-house-of-david}}

\hypertarget{section-45}{%
\section{23}\label{section-45}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Woe to the shepherds who destroy and scatter the sheep
of my pasture!'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{2} Therefore Yahweh, the God
of Israel, says against the shepherds who feed my people: ``You have
scattered my flock, driven them away, and have not visited them. Behold,
I will visit on you the evil of your doings,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{3} ``I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all the
countries where I have driven them, and will bring them again to their
folds; and they will be fruitful and multiply. \bibleverse{4} I will set
up shepherds over them who will feed them. They will no longer be afraid
or dismayed, neither will any be lacking,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{davids-sprout-promise}{%
\subsection{David's Sprout Promise}\label{davids-sprout-promise}}

\bibleverse{5} ``Behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will
raise to David a righteous Branch; and he will reign as king and deal
wisely, and will execute justice and righteousness in the land.
\bibleverse{6} In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will dwell
safely. This is his name by which he will be called: Yahweh our
righteousness. \bibleverse{7} ``Therefore, behold, the days come,'' says
Yahweh, ``that they will no more say, `As Yahweh lives, who brought up
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;' \bibleverse{8} but,
`As Yahweh lives, who brought up and who led the offspring of the house
of Israel out of the north country, and from all the countries where I
had driven them.' Then they will dwell in their own land.''

\hypertarget{deplore-the-general-corruption-and-depravity-of-spiritual-leaders}{%
\subsection{Deplore the general corruption and depravity of spiritual
leaders}\label{deplore-the-general-corruption-and-depravity-of-spiritual-leaders}}

\bibleverse{9} Concerning the prophets: My heart within me is broken.
All my bones shake. I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine
has overcome, because of Yahweh, and because of his holy words.
\bibleverse{10} ``For the land is full of adulterers; for because of the
curse the land mourns. The pastures of the wilderness have dried up.
Their course is evil, and their might is not right; \bibleverse{11} for
both prophet and priest are profane. Yes, in my house I have found their
wickedness,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{12} Therefore their way will be
to them as slippery places in the darkness. They will be driven on, and
fall therein; for I will bring evil on them, even the year of their
visitation,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{sayings-about-false-prophets}{%
\subsection{Sayings about false
prophets}\label{sayings-about-false-prophets}}

\bibleverse{13} ``I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria. They
prophesied by Baal, and caused my people Israel to err. \bibleverse{14}
In the prophets of Jerusalem I have also seen a horrible thing: they
commit adultery and walk in lies. They strengthen the hands of
evildoers, so that no one returns from his wickedness. They have all
become to me as Sodom, and its inhabitants as Gomorrah.''
\bibleverse{15} Therefore Yahweh of Armies says concerning the prophets:
``Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink poisoned
water; for from the prophets of Jerusalem ungodliness has gone out into
all the land.'' \bibleverse{16} Yahweh of Armies says, ``Don't listen to
the words of the prophets who prophesy to you. They teach you vanity.
They speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of
Yahweh. \bibleverse{17} They say continually to those who despise me,
`Yahweh has said, ``You will have peace;''\,' and to everyone who walks
in the stubbornness of his own heart they say, `No evil will come on
you.' \bibleverse{18} For who has stood in the council of Yahweh, that
he should perceive and hear his word? Who has listened to my word, and
heard it? \bibleverse{19} Behold, Yahweh's storm, his wrath, has gone
out. Yes, a whirling storm! It will burst on the head of the wicked.
\bibleverse{20} Yahweh's anger will not return until he has executed and
performed the intents of his heart. In the latter days, you will
understand it perfectly. \bibleverse{21} I didn't send these prophets,
yet they ran. I didn't speak to them, yet they prophesied.
\bibleverse{22} But if they had stood in my council, then they would
have caused my people to hear my words, and would have turned them from
their evil way, and from the evil of their doings. \bibleverse{23} ``Am
I a God at hand,'' says Yahweh, ``and not a God afar off?
\bibleverse{24} Can anyone hide himself in secret places so that I can't
see him?'' says Yahweh. ``Don't I fill heaven and earth?'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{dream-warning-of-lying-prophets}{%
\subsection{Dream warning of lying
prophets}\label{dream-warning-of-lying-prophets}}

\bibleverse{25} ``I have heard what the prophets have said, who prophesy
lies in my name, saying, `I had a dream! I had a dream!' \bibleverse{26}
How long will this be in the heart of the prophets who prophesy lies,
even the prophets of the deceit of their own heart? \bibleverse{27} They
intend to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they
each tell his neighbor, as their fathers forgot my name because of Baal.
\bibleverse{28} The prophet who has a dream, let him tell a dream; and
he who has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the straw
to the wheat?'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{29} ``Isn't my word like
fire?'' says Yahweh; ``and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?
\bibleverse{30} ``Therefore behold, I am against the prophets,'' says
Yahweh, ``who each steal my words from his neighbor. \bibleverse{31}
Behold, I am against the prophets,'' says Yahweh, ``who use their
tongues, and say, `He says.' \bibleverse{32} Behold, I am against those
who prophesy lying dreams,'' says Yahweh, ``who tell them, and cause my
people to err by their lies, and by their vain boasting; yet I didn't
send them or command them. They don't profit this people at all,'' says
Yahweh.

\hypertarget{warning-against-the-incorrect-expression-burden-of-the-lord}{%
\subsection{Warning against the incorrect expression ``burden of the
Lord''}\label{warning-against-the-incorrect-expression-burden-of-the-lord}}

\bibleverse{33} ``When this people, or the prophet, or a priest, asks
you, saying, `What is the message from Yahweh?' Then you shall tell
them, `\,``What message? I will cast you off,'' says Yahweh.'
\bibleverse{34} As for the prophet, the priest, and the people, who say,
`The message from Yahweh,' I will even punish that man and his
household. \bibleverse{35} You will say everyone to his neighbor, and
everyone to his brother, `What has Yahweh answered?' and, `What has
Yahweh said?' \bibleverse{36} You will mention the message from Yahweh
no more, for every man's own word has become his message; for you have
perverted the words of the living God, of Yahweh of Armies, our God.
\bibleverse{37} You will say to the prophet, `What has Yahweh answered
you?' and, `What has Yahweh spoken?' \bibleverse{38} Although you say,
`The message from Yahweh,' therefore Yahweh says: `Because you say this
word, ``The message from Yahweh,'' and I have sent to you, telling you
not to say, ``The message from Yahweh,'' \bibleverse{39} therefore
behold, I will utterly forget you, and I will cast you off with the city
that I gave to you and to your fathers, away from my presence.
\bibleverse{40} I will bring an everlasting reproach on you, and a
perpetual shame, which will not be forgotten.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-cara-de-las-dos-cestas-de-higos-y-el-significado-de-las-cestas}{%
\subsection{La cara de las dos cestas de higos y el significado de las
cestas}\label{la-cara-de-las-dos-cestas-de-higos-y-el-significado-de-las-cestas}}

\hypertarget{section-46}{%
\section{24}\label{section-46}}

\bibleverse{1} El Señor me mostró, y he aquí que dos cestas de higos
estaban puestas delante del templo del Señor, después que Nabucodonosor,
rey de Babilonia, había llevado cautivos a Jeconías hijo de Joacim, rey
de Judá, y a los príncipes de Judá, con los artesanos y herreros, desde
Jerusalén, y los había llevado a Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{24:1} Jer
  29,2; 2Re 24,14-15} \bibleverse{2} Una cesta tenía higos muy buenos,
como los higos que están recién maduros; y la otra cesta tenía higos muy
malos, que no se podían comer, de tan malos que estaban.

\bibleverse{3} Entonces Yahvé me preguntó: ``¿Qué ves, Jeremías?'' Dije:
``Higos. Los higos buenos son muy buenos, y los malos son muy malos, tan
malos que no se pueden comer''. \footnote{\textbf{24:3} Jer 1,11; Jer
  1,13}

\bibleverse{4} La palabra de Yahvé vino a mí, diciendo: \bibleverse{5}
``Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Como estos higos buenos, así
consideraré a los cautivos de Judá, que he enviado de este lugar a la
tierra de los caldeos, como buenos. \bibleverse{6} Porque pondré mis
ojos en ellos para bien, y los traeré de nuevo a esta tierra. Los
edificaré, y no los derribaré. Los plantaré y no los arrancaré.
\footnote{\textbf{24:6} Jer 31,28} \bibleverse{7} Les daré un corazón
para que me conozcan, que yo soy Yahvé. Serán mi pueblo, y yo seré su
Dios; porque volverán a mí con todo su corazón. \footnote{\textbf{24:7}
  Jer 31,33-34}

\bibleverse{8} ``\,`Como los higos malos, que no se pueden comer, son
tan malos', dice ciertamente el Señor, `así entregaré a Sedequías, rey
de Judá, y a sus príncipes, y al resto de Jerusalén que queda en esta
tierra, y a los que habitan en la tierra de Egipto. \footnote{\textbf{24:8}
  Jer 29,17} \bibleverse{9} Incluso los entregaré para que sean
arrojados de un lado a otro entre todos los reinos de la tierra para
mal, para que sean un oprobio y un proverbio, una burla y una maldición,
en todos los lugares adonde los conduzca. \footnote{\textbf{24:9} Jer
  29,18} \bibleverse{10} Enviaré entre ellos la espada, el hambre y la
peste, hasta que desaparezcan de la tierra que les di a ellos y a sus
padres.'\,''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-face-of-the-two-baskets-of-figs-and-the-meaning-of-the-baskets}{%
\subsection{The face of the two baskets of figs and the meaning of the
baskets}\label{the-face-of-the-two-baskets-of-figs-and-the-meaning-of-the-baskets}}

\hypertarget{section-47}{%
\section{24}\label{section-47}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh showed me, and behold, two baskets of figs were
set before Yahweh's temple, after Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had
carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and
the princes of Judah, with the craftsmen and smiths, from Jerusalem, and
had brought them to Babylon. \bibleverse{2} One basket had very good
figs, like the figs that are first-ripe; and the other basket had very
bad figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad. \bibleverse{3}
Then Yahweh asked me, ``What do you see, Jeremiah?'' I said, ``Figs. The
good figs are very good, and the bad are very bad, so bad that they
can't be eaten.'' \bibleverse{4} Yahweh's word came to me, saying,
\bibleverse{5} ``Yahweh, the God of Israel says: `Like these good figs,
so I will regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this
place into the land of the Chaldeans, as good. \bibleverse{6} For I will
set my eyes on them for good, and I will bring them again to this land.
I will build them, and not pull them down. I will plant them, and not
pluck them up. \bibleverse{7} I will give them a heart to know me, that
I am Yahweh. They will be my people, and I will be their God; for they
will return to me with their whole heart. \bibleverse{8} ``\,`As the bad
figs, which can't be eaten, they are so bad,' surely Yahweh says, `So I
will give up Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the
remnant of Jerusalem who remain in this land, and those who dwell in the
land of Egypt. \bibleverse{9} I will even give them up to be tossed back
and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil, to be a reproach
and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places where I will drive
them. \bibleverse{10} I will send the sword, the famine, and the
pestilence among them, until they are consumed from off the land that I
gave to them and to their fathers.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{indicaciuxf3n-de-tiempo-la-referencia-de-jeremuxedas-a-su-efectividad-fallida-de-23-auxf1os}{%
\subsection{Indicación de tiempo; La referencia de Jeremías a su
efectividad fallida de 23
años}\label{indicaciuxf3n-de-tiempo-la-referencia-de-jeremuxedas-a-su-efectividad-fallida-de-23-auxf1os}}

\hypertarget{section-48}{%
\section{25}\label{section-48}}

\bibleverse{1} La palabra que llegó a Jeremías sobre todo el pueblo de
Judá, en el cuarto año de Joacim hijo de Josías, rey de Judá (era el
primer año de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia), \bibleverse{2} que el
profeta Jeremías habló a todo el pueblo de Judá y a todos los habitantes
de Jerusalén: \bibleverse{3} Desde el año trece de Josías hijo de Amón,
rey de Judá, hasta el día de hoy, estos veintitrés años, me ha llegado
la palabra de Yahvé, y os he hablado, madrugando y hablando; pero no
habéis escuchado.

\bibleverse{4} Yahvé os ha enviado a todos sus siervos los profetas,
madrugando y enviándolos (pero no habéis escuchado ni inclinado vuestro
oído para oír), \bibleverse{5} diciendo: ``Volved ahora cada uno de su
mal camino y de la maldad de vuestras acciones, y habitad en la tierra
que Yahvé os ha dado a vosotros y a vuestros padres, desde siempre y
para siempre. \footnote{\textbf{25:5} Jer 18,11} \bibleverse{6} No vayan
en pos de otros dioses para servirlos o adorarlos, y no me provoquen a
ira con la obra de sus manos; entonces no les haré ningún daño.''

\bibleverse{7} ``Sin embargo, no me habéis escuchado --- dice Yahvé ---,
para provocarme a la ira con la obra de vuestras manos para vuestro
propio perjuicio.''

\hypertarget{anuncio-de-la-aniquilaciuxf3n-de-juduxe1-asuxed-como-de-los-setenta-auxf1os-de-cautiverio-en-babilonia-y-el-posterior-castigo-de-los-caldeos}{%
\subsection{Anuncio de la aniquilación de Judá, así como de los setenta
años de cautiverio en Babilonia y el posterior castigo de los
caldeos}\label{anuncio-de-la-aniquilaciuxf3n-de-juduxe1-asuxed-como-de-los-setenta-auxf1os-de-cautiverio-en-babilonia-y-el-posterior-castigo-de-los-caldeos}}

\bibleverse{8} Por eso dice Yahvé de los Ejércitos: ``Porque no habéis
oído mis palabras, \bibleverse{9} he aquí que enviaré y tomaré a todas
las familias del norte --- dice Yahvé --- y enviaré a Nabucodonosor, rey
de Babilonia, mi siervo, y los traeré contra esta tierra, y contra sus
habitantes, y contra todas estas naciones de alrededor. Los destruiré
por completo, y los convertiré en un asombro, en un silbido y en una
desolación perpetua. \footnote{\textbf{25:9} Jer 27,6} \bibleverse{10}
Además, les quitaré la voz del gozo y la voz de la alegría, la voz del
novio y la voz de la novia, el sonido de las piedras de molino y la luz
de la lámpara. \footnote{\textbf{25:10} Jer 16,9} \bibleverse{11} Toda
esta tierra será una desolación y un asombro; y estas naciones servirán
al rey de Babilonia durante setenta años. \footnote{\textbf{25:11} Jer
  29,10; 2Cró 36,21; Esd 1,1; Dan 9,2}

\bibleverse{12} ``Sucederá que cuando se cumplan setenta años, castigaré
al rey de Babilonia y a esa nación --- dice el Señor --- por su
iniquidad. Haré que la tierra de los caldeos quede desolada para
siempre. \bibleverse{13} Traeré sobre esa tierra todas mis palabras que
he pronunciado contra ella, todo lo que está escrito en este libro, que
Jeremías ha profetizado contra todas las naciones. \bibleverse{14}
Porque muchas naciones y grandes reyes los harán siervos, incluso de
ellos. Los recompensaré según sus hechos y según la obra de sus manos''.

\hypertarget{la-copa-de-la-ira-y-la-espada-de-dios-para-todos-los-pueblos}{%
\subsection{La copa de la ira y la espada de Dios para todos los
pueblos}\label{la-copa-de-la-ira-y-la-espada-de-dios-para-todos-los-pueblos}}

\bibleverse{15} Porque Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, me dice ``Toma de mi
mano esta copa del vino de la ira, y haz que la beban todas las naciones
a las que te envío. \footnote{\textbf{25:15} Jer 51,7; Is 51,17; Apoc
  14,10} \bibleverse{16} Beberán, se tambalearán y se volverán locos, a
causa de la espada que enviaré entre ellos.''

\bibleverse{17} Entonces tomé la copa de la mano de Yahvé, e hice beber
a todas las naciones a las que Yahvé me había enviado: \bibleverse{18}
Jerusalén y las ciudades de Judá, con sus reyes y sus príncipes, para
convertirlas en desolación, asombro, silbido y maldición, como lo es
hoy; \bibleverse{19} Faraón, rey de Egipto, con sus siervos, sus
príncipes y todo su pueblo \bibleverse{20} y todo el pueblo mixto, y
todos los reyes de la tierra de Uz, todos los reyes de los filisteos,
Ascalón, Gaza, Ecrón y el resto de Asdod; \bibleverse{21} Edom, Moab y
los hijos de Amón \bibleverse{22} y todos los reyes de Tiro, todos los
reyes de Sidón, y los reyes de la isla que está al otro lado del mar;
\bibleverse{23} Dedán, Tema, Buz, y todos los que tienen las comisuras
de la barba cortadas; \footnote{\textbf{25:23} Jer 9,26} \bibleverse{24}
y todos los reyes de Arabia, todos los reyes de los pueblos mixtos que
habitan en el desierto \bibleverse{25} y todos los reyes de Zimri, todos
los reyes de Elam, y todos los reyes de los medos; \bibleverse{26} y
todos los reyes del norte, de lejos y de cerca, unos con otros; y todos
los reinos del mundo, que están sobre la superficie de la tierra. El rey
de Sheshach beberá después de ellos.

\bibleverse{27} ``Les dirás: `El Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de
Israel, dice: ``Bebed y embriagaos, vomitad, caed y no os levantéis más,
a causa de la espada que voy a enviar entre vosotros''\,'.
\bibleverse{28} Si se niegan a tomar la copa de tu mano para beber, les
dirás: ``El Señor de los Ejércitos dice: ``Bebed sin falta.
\bibleverse{29} Porque he aquí que yo comienzo a obrar el mal en la
ciudad que se llama con mi nombre; ¿y tú has de quedar totalmente
impune? No quedarás impune; porque llamaré a la espada a todos los
habitantes de la tierra, dice el Señor de los Ejércitos''. \footnote{\textbf{25:29}
  Jer 49,12; 1Pe 4,17}

\hypertarget{dios-aparece-en-el-juicio-final-aniquilaciuxf3n-de-los-pueblos}{%
\subsection{Dios aparece en el Juicio Final; Aniquilación de los
pueblos}\label{dios-aparece-en-el-juicio-final-aniquilaciuxf3n-de-los-pueblos}}

\bibleverse{30} ``Por tanto, profetiza contra ellos todas estas
palabras, y diles, ``\,`Yahvé rugirá desde lo alto, y pronuncie su voz
desde su santa morada. Rugirá poderosamente contra su redil. Dará un
grito, como los que pisan las uvas, contra todos los habitantes de la
tierra. \footnote{\textbf{25:30} Jl 3,16; Am 1,2; Os 11,10}
\bibleverse{31} Un ruido llegará hasta el final de la tierra; porque
Yahvé tiene una controversia con las naciones. Entrará en juicio con
toda la carne. En cuanto a los malvados, los entregará a la espada'',
dice Yahvé''.

\bibleverse{32} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice, ``He aquí que el mal
saldrá de nación en nación, y se levantará una gran tormenta desde los
confines de la tierra''. \bibleverse{33} Los muertos de Yahvé estarán en
ese día desde un extremo de la tierra hasta el otro extremo de la
tierra. No serán lamentados. No serán recogidos ni enterrados. Serán
estiércol en la superficie de la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{25:33} Jer
  7,33} \bibleverse{34} Aullad, pastores, y llorad. Revuélcate en el
polvo, líder del rebaño; porque los días de tu matanza y de tus
dispersiones han llegado plenamente, y caerás como la cerámica fina.
\footnote{\textbf{25:34} Jer 23,1} \bibleverse{35} Los pastores no
tendrán forma de huir. El líder del rebaño no tendrá escapatoria.
\bibleverse{36} La voz del grito de los pastores, y el lamento del líder
del rebaño, porque Yahvé destruye sus pastos. \bibleverse{37} Los
pacíficos pliegues son llevados al silencioa causa de la feroz ira de
Yahvé. \bibleverse{38} Ha abandonado su guarida, como el león; porque su
tierra se ha convertido en un asombro a causa de la ferocidad de la
opresión, y por su feroz ira. \footnote{\textbf{25:38} Jer 4,7}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{timestamp-jeremiahs-reference-to-his-failed-era-of-23-years}{%
\subsection{Timestamp; Jeremiah's reference to his failed ERA of 23
years}\label{timestamp-jeremiahs-reference-to-his-failed-era-of-23-years}}

\hypertarget{section-49}{%
\section{25}\label{section-49}}

\bibleverse{1} The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people
of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of
Judah (this was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon),
\bibleverse{2} which Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all the people of
Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: \bibleverse{3} From the
thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this
day, these twenty-three years, Yahweh's word has come to me, and I have
spoken to you, rising up early and speaking; but you have not listened.
\bibleverse{4} Yahweh has sent to you all his servants the prophets,
rising up early and sending them (but you have not listened or inclined
your ear to hear), \bibleverse{5} saying, ``Return now everyone from his
evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that
Yahweh has given to you and to your fathers, from of old and even
forever more. \bibleverse{6} Don't go after other gods to serve them or
worship them, and don't provoke me to anger with the work of your hands;
then I will do you no harm.'' \bibleverse{7} ``Yet you have not listened
to me,'' says Yahweh, ``that you may provoke me to anger with the work
of your hands to your own hurt.''

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-annihilation-of-judah-as-well-as-the-seventy-years-of-captivity-in-babylon-and-the-subsequent-punishment-of-the-chaldeans}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the annihilation of Judah, as well as the
seventy years of captivity in Babylon and the subsequent punishment of
the
Chaldeans}\label{announcement-of-the-annihilation-of-judah-as-well-as-the-seventy-years-of-captivity-in-babylon-and-the-subsequent-punishment-of-the-chaldeans}}

\bibleverse{8} Therefore Yahweh of Armies says: ``Because you have not
heard my words, \bibleverse{9} behold, I will send and take all the
families of the north,'' says Yahweh, ``and I will send to
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them
against this land, and against its inhabitants, and against all these
nations around. I will utterly destroy them, and make them an
astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations. \bibleverse{10}
Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth and the voice of
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the
sound of the millstones, and the light of the lamp. \bibleverse{11} This
whole land will be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations
will serve the king of Babylon seventy years. \bibleverse{12} ``It will
happen, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king
of Babylon and that nation,'' says Yahweh, ``for their iniquity. I will
make the land of the Chaldeans desolate forever. \bibleverse{13} I will
bring on that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even
all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah has prophesied against
all the nations. \bibleverse{14} For many nations and great kings will
make bondservants of them, even of them. I will recompense them
according to their deeds, and according to the work of their hands.''

\hypertarget{the-cup-of-wrath-and-the-sword-of-god-for-all-peoples}{%
\subsection{The cup of wrath and the sword of God for all
peoples}\label{the-cup-of-wrath-and-the-sword-of-god-for-all-peoples}}

\bibleverse{15} For Yahweh, the God of Israel, says to me: ``Take this
cup of the wine of wrath from my hand, and cause all the nations to whom
I send you to drink it. \bibleverse{16} They will drink, and reel back
and forth, and be insane, because of the sword that I will send among
them.'' \bibleverse{17} Then I took the cup at Yahweh's hand, and made
all the nations to drink, to whom Yahweh had sent me: \bibleverse{18}
Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, with its kings and its princes, to
make them a desolation, an astonishment, a hissing, and a curse, as it
is today; \bibleverse{19} Pharaoh king of Egypt, with his servants, his
princes, and all his people; \bibleverse{20} and all the mixed people,
and all the kings of the land of Uz, all the kings of the Philistines,
Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod; \bibleverse{21} Edom,
Moab, and the children of Ammon; \bibleverse{22} and all the kings of
Tyre, all the kings of Sidon, and the kings of the isle which is beyond
the sea; \bibleverse{23} Dedan, Tema, Buz, and all who have the corners
of their beard cut off; \bibleverse{24} and all the kings of Arabia, all
the kings of the mixed people who dwell in the wilderness;
\bibleverse{25} and all the kings of Zimri, all the kings of Elam, and
all the kings of the Medes; \bibleverse{26} and all the kings of the
north, far and near, one with another; and all the kingdoms of the
world, which are on the surface of the earth. The king of Sheshach will
drink after them. \bibleverse{27} ``You shall tell them, `Yahweh of
Armies, the God of Israel says: ``Drink, and be drunk, vomit, fall, and
rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.''\,'
\bibleverse{28} It shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at your hand
to drink, then you shall tell them, `Yahweh of Armies says: ``You shall
surely drink. \bibleverse{29} For, behold, I begin to work evil at the
city which is called by my name; and should you be utterly unpunished?
You will not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword on all the
inhabitants of the earth, says Yahweh of Armies.''\,'

\hypertarget{god-appears-at-the-last-judgment-annihilation-of-the-peoples}{%
\subsection{God appears at the Last Judgment; annihilation of the
peoples}\label{god-appears-at-the-last-judgment-annihilation-of-the-peoples}}

\bibleverse{30} ``Therefore prophesy against them all these words, and
tell them, ``\,`Yahweh will roar from on high, and utter his voice from
his holy habitation. He will mightily roar against his fold. He will
give a shout, as those who tread grapes, against all the inhabitants of
the earth. \bibleverse{31} A noise will come even to the end of the
earth; for Yahweh has a controversy with the nations. He will enter into
judgment with all flesh. As for the wicked, he will give them to the
sword,''\,' says Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{32} Yahweh of Armies says,
``Behold, evil will go out from nation to nation, and a great storm will
be raised up from the uttermost parts of the earth.'' \bibleverse{33}
The slain of Yahweh will be at that day from one end of the earth even
to the other end of the earth. They won't be lamented. They won't be
gathered or buried. They will be dung on the surface of the ground.
\bibleverse{34} Wail, you shepherds, and cry. Wallow in dust, you leader
of the flock; for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions
have fully come, and you will fall like fine pottery. \bibleverse{35}
The shepherds will have no way to flee. The leader of the flock will
have no escape. \bibleverse{36} A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and
the wailing of the leader of the flock, for Yahweh destroys their
pasture. \bibleverse{37} The peaceful folds are brought to silence
because of the fierce anger of Yahweh. \bibleverse{38} He has left his
covert, as the lion; for their land has become an astonishment because
of the fierceness of the oppression, and because of his fierce anger.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{introducciuxf3n-indicaciuxf3n-del-contenido-principal-del-discurso-captura-de-jeremuxedas}{%
\subsection{Introducción; Indicación del contenido principal del
discurso; Captura de
Jeremías}\label{introducciuxf3n-indicaciuxf3n-del-contenido-principal-del-discurso-captura-de-jeremuxedas}}

\hypertarget{section-50}{%
\section{26}\label{section-50}}

\bibleverse{1} Al comienzo del reinado de Joacim, hijo de Josías, rey de
Judá, vino esta palabra de Yahvé \bibleverse{2} ``Dice Yahvé: `Ponte en
el atrio de la casa de Yahvé y habla a todas las ciudades de Judá que
vienen a adorar a la casa de Yahvé, todas las palabras que yo te mando
que les digas. No omitas ni una palabra. \bibleverse{3} Puede ser que
escuchen y que cada uno se convierta de su mal camino, para que yo me
retraiga del mal que pienso hacerles a causa de la maldad de sus
acciones.'' \footnote{\textbf{26:3} Jer 36,3} \bibleverse{4} Les dirás:
``Yahvé dice: `Si no me escuchan, para andar en mi ley que he puesto
delante de ustedes, \bibleverse{5} para escuchar las palabras de mis
siervos los profetas que les envío, incluso levantándose temprano y
enviándolos --- pero ustedes no han escuchado --- \footnote{\textbf{26:5}
  Jer 25,4} \bibleverse{6} entonces haré que esta casa sea como Silo, y
haré que esta ciudad sea una maldición para todas las naciones de la
tierra.'\,'' \footnote{\textbf{26:6} Jer 7,12-14; 1Sam 4,4; 1Sam 4,12}

\bibleverse{7} Los sacerdotes, los profetas y todo el pueblo oyeron a
Jeremías decir estas palabras en la casa de Yavé. \bibleverse{8} Cuando
Jeremías terminó de decir todo lo que Yavé le había ordenado a todo el
pueblo, los sacerdotes y los profetas y todo el pueblo lo agarraron,
diciendo: ``¡Seguro que morirás! \bibleverse{9} ¿Por qué has profetizado
en nombre de Yavé, diciendo: `Esta casa será como Silo, y esta ciudad
quedará desolada, sin habitantes'?'' Todo el pueblo se agolpó alrededor
de Jeremías en la casa de Yahvé.

\hypertarget{el-juicio-ante-los-superiores-la-absoluciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-la-intercesiuxf3n-de-algunos-ancianos-por-uxe9l}{%
\subsection{El juicio ante los superiores; La absolución de Jeremías; la
intercesión de algunos ancianos por
él}\label{el-juicio-ante-los-superiores-la-absoluciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-la-intercesiuxf3n-de-algunos-ancianos-por-uxe9l}}

\bibleverse{10} Cuando los príncipes de Judá oyeron estas cosas,
subieron de la casa del rey a la casa de Yavé, y se sentaron a la
entrada de la puerta nueva de la casa de Yavé. \bibleverse{11} Entonces
los sacerdotes y los profetas hablaron a los príncipes y a todo el
pueblo, diciendo: ``Este hombre es digno de muerte, pues ha profetizado
contra esta ciudad, como ustedes han oído con sus oídos.'' \footnote{\textbf{26:11}
  Hech 6,13}

\bibleverse{12} Entonces Jeremías habló a todos los príncipes y a todo
el pueblo, diciendo: ``El Señor me ha enviado a profetizar contra esta
casa y contra esta ciudad todas las palabras que habéis oído.
\bibleverse{13} Ahora, pues, enmendad vuestros caminos y vuestras
acciones, y obedeced la voz de Yavé, vuestro Dios; entonces Yavé se
retractará del mal que ha pronunciado contra vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{26:13}
  Jer 7,3} \bibleverse{14} Pero en cuanto a mí, he aquí que estoy en tus
manos. Haz conmigo lo que sea bueno y justo a tus ojos. \bibleverse{15}
Sólo sepan con certeza que si me matan, traerán sangre inocente sobre
ustedes, sobre esta ciudad y sobre sus habitantes; porque en verdad
Yahvé me ha enviado a ustedes para decir todas estas palabras en sus
oídos.''

\bibleverse{16} Entonces los príncipes y todo el pueblo dijeron a los
sacerdotes y a los profetas ``Este hombre no es digno de morir, pues nos
ha hablado en nombre de Yahvé, nuestro Dios''.

\bibleverse{17} Entonces algunos de los ancianos del país se levantaron
y hablaron a toda la asamblea del pueblo, diciendo: \bibleverse{18}
``Miqueas el morashtita profetizó en los días de Ezequías, rey de Judá,
y habló a todo el pueblo de Judá, diciendo: ``Dice el Señor de los
Ejércitos: ``\,`Sión será arada como un campo, y Jerusalén se convertirá
en un montón, y el monte de la casa como las alturas de un bosque'.
\footnote{\textbf{26:18} Miq 3,12} \bibleverse{19} ¿Acaso Ezequías, rey
de Judá, y todo Judá le dieron muerte? ¿No temió él a Yahvé, y suplicó
el favor de Yahvé, y Yahvé se desdijo del desastre que había pronunciado
contra ellos? Así cometeríamos un gran mal contra nuestras propias
almas''. \footnote{\textbf{26:19} Jer 18,8}

\hypertarget{el-siniestro-destino-del-profeta-uruxedas}{%
\subsection{El siniestro destino del profeta
Urías}\label{el-siniestro-destino-del-profeta-uruxedas}}

\bibleverse{20} Había también un hombre que profetizaba en nombre de
Yavé, Urías hijo de Semaías, de Quiriat Jearim; y profetizó contra esta
ciudad y contra esta tierra según todas las palabras de Jeremías.
\bibleverse{21} Cuando el rey Joacim, con todos sus valientes y todos
los príncipes, oyó sus palabras, el rey trató de matarlo; pero cuando
Urías lo oyó, tuvo miedo, huyó y se fue a Egipto. \bibleverse{22}
Entonces el rey Joacim envió a Egipto a Elnatán, hijo de Acbor, y a
algunos hombres con él. \bibleverse{23} Ellos sacaron a Urías de Egipto
y lo llevaron ante el rey Joacim, quien lo mató a espada y arrojó su
cadáver a las tumbas del pueblo.

\bibleverse{24} Pero la mano de Ajicam, hijo de Safán, estaba con
Jeremías, para que no lo entregaran en manos del pueblo para matarlo.
\footnote{\textbf{26:24} 2Re 22,12}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{introduction-indication-of-the-main-content-of-the-speech-capture-of-jeremiah}{%
\subsection{Introduction; Indication of the main content of the speech;
Capture of
Jeremiah}\label{introduction-indication-of-the-main-content-of-the-speech-capture-of-jeremiah}}

\hypertarget{section-51}{%
\section{26}\label{section-51}}

\bibleverse{1} In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, king of Judah, this word came from Yahweh: \bibleverse{2}
``Yahweh says: `Stand in the court of Yahweh's house, and speak to all
the cities of Judah which come to worship in Yahweh's house, all the
words that I command you to speak to them. Don't omit a word.
\bibleverse{3} It may be they will listen, and every man turn from his
evil way, that I may relent from the evil which I intend to do to them
because of the evil of their doings.'\,'' \bibleverse{4} You shall tell
them, ``Yahweh says: `If you will not listen to me, to walk in my law
which I have set before you, \bibleverse{5} to listen to the words of my
servants the prophets whom I send to you, even rising up early and
sending them---but you have not listened--- \bibleverse{6} then I will
make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the
nations of the earth.'\,'' \bibleverse{7} The priests and the prophets
and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in Yahweh's
house. \bibleverse{8} When Jeremiah had finished speaking all that
Yahweh had commanded him to speak to all the people, the priests and the
prophets and all the people seized him, saying, ``You shall surely die!
\bibleverse{9} Why have you prophesied in Yahweh's name, saying, `This
house will be like Shiloh, and this city will be desolate, without
inhabitant?'\,'' All the people were crowded around Jeremiah in Yahweh's
house.

\hypertarget{the-trial-before-superiors-the-acquittal-of-jeremiah-the-intercession-of-some-elders-for-him}{%
\subsection{The trial before superiors; The acquittal of Jeremiah; the
intercession of some elders for
him}\label{the-trial-before-superiors-the-acquittal-of-jeremiah-the-intercession-of-some-elders-for-him}}

\bibleverse{10} When the princes of Judah heard these things, they came
up from the king's house to Yahweh's house; and they sat in the entry of
the new gate of Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{11} Then the priests and the
prophets spoke to the princes and to all the people, saying, ``This man
is worthy of death, for he has prophesied against this city, as you have
heard with your ears.'' \bibleverse{12} Then Jeremiah spoke to all the
princes and to all the people, saying, ``Yahweh sent me to prophesy
against this house and against this city all the words that you have
heard. \bibleverse{13} Now therefore amend your ways and your doings,
and obey Yahweh your God's voice; then Yahweh will relent from the evil
that he has pronounced against you. \bibleverse{14} But as for me,
behold, I am in your hand. Do with me what is good and right in your
eyes. \bibleverse{15} Only know for certain that if you put me to death,
you will bring innocent blood on yourselves, on this city, and on its
inhabitants; for in truth Yahweh has sent me to you to speak all these
words in your ears.'' \bibleverse{16} Then the princes and all the
people said to the priests and to the prophets: ``This man is not worthy
of death; for he has spoken to us in the name of Yahweh our God.''
\bibleverse{17} Then certain of the elders of the land rose up, and
spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying, \bibleverse{18} ``Micah
the Morashtite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah; and he
spoke to all the people of Judah, saying, `Yahweh of Armies says:
``\,`Zion will be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem will become heaps,
and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.'
\bibleverse{19} Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him to
death? Didn't he fear Yahweh, and entreat the favor of Yahweh, and
Yahweh relented of the disaster which he had pronounced against them? We
would commit great evil against our own souls that way!''

\hypertarget{the-sinister-fate-of-the-prophet-uriah}{%
\subsection{The sinister fate of the prophet
Uriah}\label{the-sinister-fate-of-the-prophet-uriah}}

\bibleverse{20} There was also a man who prophesied in Yahweh's name,
Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath Jearim; and he prophesied against
this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah.
\bibleverse{21} When Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men and all
the princes heard his words, the king sought to put him to death; but
when Uriah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt.
\bibleverse{22} Then Jehoiakim the king sent Elnathan the son of Achbor
and certain men with him into Egypt. \bibleverse{23} They fetched Uriah
out of Egypt and brought him to Jehoiakim the king, who killed him with
the sword and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.
\bibleverse{24} But the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with
Jeremiah, so that they didn't give him into the hand of the people to
put him to death.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-yugo-en-el-cuello-advierte-a-los-enviados-de-algunos-estados-extranjeros}{%
\subsection{Jeremías, yugo en el cuello, advierte a los enviados de
algunos estados
extranjeros}\label{jeremuxedas-yugo-en-el-cuello-advierte-a-los-enviados-de-algunos-estados-extranjeros}}

\hypertarget{section-52}{%
\section{27}\label{section-52}}

\bibleverse{1} Al comienzo del reinado de Joacim, hijo de Josías, rey de
Judá, llegó a Jeremías esta palabra de parte de Yavé, que decía:
\bibleverse{2} Yavé me dice ``Hazte de ataduras y rejas, y póntelas al
cuello. \footnote{\textbf{27:2} Jer 13,1} \bibleverse{3} Luego envíalos
al rey de Edom, al rey de Moab, al rey de los hijos de Amón, al rey de
Tiro y al rey de Sidón, por mano de los mensajeros que vienen a
Jerusalén a Sedequías, rey de Judá. \footnote{\textbf{27:3} Jer 25,21-22}
\bibleverse{4} Dadles una orden a sus amos, diciendo: ``El Señor de los
Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``Diréis a vuestros amos
\bibleverse{5} `Yo he hecho la tierra, los hombres y los animales que
están sobre la superficie de la tierra con mi gran poder y con mi brazo
extendido. Yo se la doy a quien me parece justo. \bibleverse{6} Yo he
entregado todas estas tierras en manos de Nabucodonosor, rey de
Babilonia, mi siervo. También le he dado los animales del campo para que
le sirvan. \footnote{\textbf{27:6} Jer 25,9} \bibleverse{7} Todas las
naciones le servirán a él, a su hijo y al hijo de su hijo, hasta que
llegue el tiempo de su propia tierra. Entonces muchas naciones y grandes
reyes lo harán su siervo. \footnote{\textbf{27:7} Jer 25,12}

\bibleverse{8} ``\,``\,`Sucederá que castigaré a la nación y al reino
que no sirvan al mismo Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, y que no pongan
su cuello bajo el yugo del rey de Babilonia', dice Yahvé, `con espada,
con hambre y con pestilencia, hasta que los haya consumido por su mano.
\bibleverse{9} Pero en cuanto a ustedes, no escuchen a sus profetas, a
sus adivinos, a sus sueños, a sus adivinos o a sus hechiceros, que les
hablan diciendo: ``No servirán al rey de Babilonia''; \footnote{\textbf{27:9}
  Jer 14,13-14} \bibleverse{10} porque les profetizan una mentira, para
alejarlos de su tierra, para que yo los expulse y perezcan.
\bibleverse{11} Pero a la nación que ponga su cuello bajo el yugo del
rey de Babilonia y le sirva, a esa nación la dejaré permanecer en su
propia tierra --- dice el Señor --- y la cultivará y habitará en
ella''\,''.

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-dirige-la-misma-advertencia-al-rey-juduxedo-sedechuxeeas}{%
\subsection{Jeremías dirige la misma advertencia al rey judío
Sedechîas}\label{jeremuxedas-dirige-la-misma-advertencia-al-rey-juduxedo-sedechuxeeas}}

\bibleverse{12} De acuerdo con todas estas palabras, hablé a Sedequías,
rey de Judá, diciendo: ``Poned vuestros cuellos bajo el yugo del rey de
Babilonia, y servidle a él y a su pueblo, y vivid. \bibleverse{13} ¿Por
qué vas a morir, tú y tu pueblo, a causa de la espada, del hambre y de
la peste, como lo ha dicho el Señor respecto a la nación que no quiere
servir al rey de Babilonia? \bibleverse{14} No escuches las palabras de
los profetas que te hablan diciendo: ``No servirás al rey de
Babilonia'', porque te profetizan una mentira. \footnote{\textbf{27:14}
  Jer 27,9} \bibleverse{15} Porque yo no los he enviado --- dice el
Señor ---, sino que ellos profetizan falsamente en mi nombre, para que
yo los expulse y perezcan, ustedes y los profetas que les profetizan.''

\hypertarget{la-advertencia-de-jeremuxedas-a-los-sacerdotes-y-al-pueblo}{%
\subsection{La advertencia de Jeremías a los sacerdotes y al
pueblo}\label{la-advertencia-de-jeremuxedas-a-los-sacerdotes-y-al-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{16} También hablé a los sacerdotes y a todo este pueblo,
diciendo: El Señor dice: ``No escuchen las palabras de sus profetas que
les profetizan, diciendo: `He aquí que los utensilios de la casa de Yavé
volverán pronto de Babilonia'; porque les profetizan una mentira.
\footnote{\textbf{27:16} Jer 28,3; 2Cró 36,10} \bibleverse{17} No les
hagan caso. Sirvan al rey de Babilonia y vivan. ¿Por qué ha de
convertirse esta ciudad en una desolación? \bibleverse{18} Pero si son
profetas, y si la palabra de Yavé está con ellos, que intercedan ahora
ante Yavé de los Ejércitos para que los utensilios que quedan en la casa
de Yavé, en la casa del rey de Judá y en Jerusalén, no vayan a
Babilonia. \bibleverse{19} Porque Yahvé de los Ejércitos dice respecto a
las columnas, respecto al mar, respecto a las bases y respecto al resto
de los utensilios que quedan en esta ciudad, \footnote{\textbf{27:19}
  Jer 52,17} \bibleverse{20} que Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, no
tomó cuando llevó cautivo a Jeconías, hijo de Joacim, rey de Judá, de
Jerusalén a Babilonia, y a todos los nobles de Judá y de Jerusalén ---
\footnote{\textbf{27:20} 2Re 24,14-15} \bibleverse{21} sí, Yahvé de los
Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice con respecto a los utensilios que
quedan en la casa de Yahvé, y en la casa del rey de Judá, y en
Jerusalén: \bibleverse{22} `Serán llevados a Babilonia, y allí estarán
hasta el día en que yo los visite --- dice Yahvé --- entonces los haré
subir y los devolveré a este lugar.'\,'' \footnote{\textbf{27:22} 2Cró
  36,22; Esd 1,7-11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiah-yoke-on-his-neck-warns-the-envoys-of-some-foreign-states}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah, yoke on his neck, warns the envoys of some foreign
states}\label{jeremiah-yoke-on-his-neck-warns-the-envoys-of-some-foreign-states}}

\hypertarget{section-53}{%
\section{27}\label{section-53}}

\bibleverse{1} In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,
\bibleverse{2} Yahweh says to me: ``Make bonds and bars, and put them on
your neck. \bibleverse{3} Then send them to the king of Edom, to the
king of Moab, to the king of the children of Ammon, to the king of Tyre,
and to the king of Sidon, by the hand of the messengers who come to
Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah. \bibleverse{4} Give them a command
to their masters, saying, `Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says,
``You shall tell your masters: \bibleverse{5} `I have made the earth,
the men, and the animals that are on the surface of the earth by my
great power and by my outstretched arm. I give it to whom it seems right
to me. \bibleverse{6} Now I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant. I have also given the
animals of the field to him to serve him. \bibleverse{7} All the nations
will serve him, his son, and his son's son, until the time of his own
land comes. Then many nations and great kings will make him their
bondservant. \bibleverse{8} ``\,`\,``\,`It will happen that I will
punish the nation and the kingdom which will not serve the same
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under
the yoke of the king of Babylon,' says Yahweh, `with the sword, with
famine, and with pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.
\bibleverse{9} But as for you, don't listen to your prophets, to your
diviners, to your dreams, to your soothsayers, or to your sorcerers, who
speak to you, saying, ``You shall not serve the king of Babylon;''
\bibleverse{10} for they prophesy a lie to you, to remove you far from
your land, so that I would drive you out, and you would perish.
\bibleverse{11} But the nation that brings their neck under the yoke of
the king of Babylon and serves him, that nation I will let remain in
their own land,' says Yahweh; `and they will till it and dwell in
it.'\,''\,'\,''

\hypertarget{jeremiah-addresses-the-same-warning-to-the-jewish-king-zedekiah}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah addresses the same warning to the Jewish King
Zedekiah}\label{jeremiah-addresses-the-same-warning-to-the-jewish-king-zedekiah}}

\bibleverse{12} I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these
words, saying, ``Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon,
and serve him and his people, and live. \bibleverse{13} Why will you
die, you and your people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence, as Yahweh has spoken concerning the nation that will not
serve the king of Babylon? \bibleverse{14} Don't listen to the words of
the prophets who speak to you, saying, `You shall not serve the king of
Babylon;' for they prophesy a lie to you. \bibleverse{15} For I have not
sent them,'' says Yahweh, ``but they prophesy falsely in my name; that I
may drive you out, and that you may perish, you, and the prophets who
prophesy to you.''

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-warning-to-the-priests-and-the-people}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's warning to the priests and the
people}\label{jeremiahs-warning-to-the-priests-and-the-people}}

\bibleverse{16} Also I spoke to the priests and to all this people,
saying, Yahweh says, ``Don't listen to the words of your prophets who
prophesy to you, saying, `Behold, the vessels of Yahweh's house will now
shortly be brought again from Babylon;' for they prophesy a lie to you.
\bibleverse{17} Don't listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon, and
live. Why should this city become a desolation? \bibleverse{18} But if
they are prophets, and if Yahweh's word is with them, let them now make
intercession to Yahweh of Armies, that the vessels which are left in
Yahweh's house, in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem,
don't go to Babylon. \bibleverse{19} For Yahweh of Armies says
concerning the pillars, concerning the sea, concerning the bases, and
concerning the rest of the vessels that are left in this city,
\bibleverse{20} which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon didn't take when he
carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from
Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem---
\bibleverse{21} yes, Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says
concerning the vessels that are left in Yahweh's house, and in the house
of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem: \bibleverse{22} `They will be
carried to Babylon, and there they will be, until the day that I visit
them,' says Yahweh; `then I will bring them up, and restore them to this
place.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-dicho-de-hananya-y-la-respuesta-de-jeremuxedas}{%
\subsection{El dicho de Hananya y la respuesta de
Jeremías}\label{el-dicho-de-hananya-y-la-respuesta-de-jeremuxedas}}

\hypertarget{section-54}{%
\section{28}\label{section-54}}

\bibleverse{1} Ese mismo año, al comienzo del reinado de Sedequías, rey
de Judá, en el cuarto año, en el quinto mes, el profeta Hananías, hijo
de Azzur, que era de Gabaón, me habló en la casa de Yavé, en presencia
de los sacerdotes y de todo el pueblo, diciendo: \bibleverse{2} ``El
Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``He roto el yugo del
rey de Babilonia. \bibleverse{3} Dentro de dos años completos traeré de
nuevo a este lugar todos los utensilios de la casa de Yavé que
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, sacó de este lugar y llevó a Babilonia.
\footnote{\textbf{28:3} Jer 27,16} \bibleverse{4} Volveré a traer a este
lugar a Jeconías hijo de Joacim, rey de Judá, con todos los cautivos de
Judá que fueron a Babilonia --- dice Yavé ---, porque romperé el yugo
del rey de Babilonia.'' \footnote{\textbf{28:4} Jer 27,20}

\bibleverse{5} Entonces el profeta Jeremías dijo al profeta Ananías en
presencia de los sacerdotes y de todo el pueblo que estaba en la casa de
Yahvé: \bibleverse{6} El profeta Jeremías dijo: ``¡Amén! Que Yahvé lo
haga. Que Yahvé cumpla tus palabras que has profetizado, para hacer
volver de Babilonia a este lugar los utensilios de la casa de Yahvé y a
todos los cautivos. \bibleverse{7} Sin embargo, escucha ahora esta
palabra que hablo en tus oídos y en los de todo el pueblo:
\bibleverse{8} Los profetas que han sido antes de mí y antes de ti, de
antaño, profetizaron contra muchos países y contra grandes reinos, de
guerra, de maldad y de pestilencia. \bibleverse{9} En cuanto al profeta
que profetiza de paz, cuando la palabra del profeta se cumpla, entonces
se sabrá que Yahvé lo ha enviado verdaderamente''.

\hypertarget{las-acciones-violentas-de-hananya-y-el-veredicto-divino-de-jeremuxedas-sentencia-de-muerte-sobre-uxe9l}{%
\subsection{Las acciones violentas de Hananya y el veredicto divino de
Jeremías (sentencia de muerte) sobre
él}\label{las-acciones-violentas-de-hananya-y-el-veredicto-divino-de-jeremuxedas-sentencia-de-muerte-sobre-uxe9l}}

\bibleverse{10} Entonces el profeta Hananías tomó la barra del cuello
del profeta Jeremías y la rompió. \footnote{\textbf{28:10} Jer 27,2}
\bibleverse{11} Hananías habló en presencia de todo el pueblo, diciendo:
``Yahvé dice: `Así romperé el yugo de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia,
del cuello de todas las naciones dentro de dos años completos'\,''.
Entonces el profeta Jeremías siguió su camino. \footnote{\textbf{28:11}
  Jer 28,3}

\bibleverse{12} Entonces vino la palabra de Yavé a Jeremías, después de
que el profeta Hananías rompiera la barra del cuello del profeta
Jeremías, diciendo: \bibleverse{13} ``Ve y dile a Hananías, diciendo:
``Yavé dice: ``Tú has roto las barras de madera, pero has hecho en su
lugar barras de hierro.'' \bibleverse{14} Porque el Señor de los
Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``He puesto un yugo de hierro sobre
el cuello de todas estas naciones, para que sirvan a Nabucodonosor, rey
de Babilonia, y le servirán. También le he dado los animales del
campo''\,''. \footnote{\textbf{28:14} Jer 27,6}

\bibleverse{15} Entonces el profeta Jeremías dijo al profeta Hananías:
``¡Escucha, Hananías! El Señor no te ha enviado, sino que haces que este
pueblo confíe en una mentira. \bibleverse{16} Por eso Yahvé dice: `He
aquí que yo te despido de la superficie de la tierra. Este año morirás,
porque has hablado con rebeldía contra el Señor'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{28:16}
  Jer 23,14; Jer 29,32}

\bibleverse{17} Así que el profeta Ananías murió el mismo año en el
séptimo mes.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{hananyas-saying-and-jeremiahs-response}{%
\subsection{Hananya's saying and Jeremiah's
response}\label{hananyas-saying-and-jeremiahs-response}}

\hypertarget{section-55}{%
\section{28}\label{section-55}}

\bibleverse{1} That same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah
king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, Hananiah the son
of Azzur, the prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke to me in Yahweh's house,
in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, `I have
broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. \bibleverse{3} Within two full
years I will bring again into this place all the vessels of Yahweh's
house that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place and
carried to Babylon. \bibleverse{4} I will bring again to this place
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the captives of
Judah, who went to Babylon,' says Yahweh; `for I will break the yoke of
the king of Babylon.'\,'' \bibleverse{5} Then the prophet Jeremiah said
to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the
presence of all the people who stood in Yahweh's house, \bibleverse{6}
even the prophet Jeremiah said, ``Amen! May Yahweh do so. May Yahweh
perform your words which you have prophesied, to bring again the vessels
of Yahweh's house, and all those who are captives, from Babylon to this
place. \bibleverse{7} Nevertheless listen now to this word that I speak
in your ears, and in the ears of all the people: \bibleverse{8} The
prophets who have been before me and before you of old prophesied
against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, of evil, and
of pestilence. \bibleverse{9} As for the prophet who prophesies of
peace, when the word of the prophet happens, then the prophet will be
known, that Yahweh has truly sent him.''

\hypertarget{hananyas-violent-actions-and-jeremiahs-divine-verdict-death-sentence-upon-him}{%
\subsection{Hananya's violent actions and Jeremiah's divine verdict
(death sentence) upon
him}\label{hananyas-violent-actions-and-jeremiahs-divine-verdict-death-sentence-upon-him}}

\bibleverse{10} Then Hananiah the prophet took the bar from off the
prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it. \bibleverse{11} Hananiah spoke in
the presence of all the people, saying, ``Yahweh says: `Even so I will
break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from off the neck of
all the nations within two full years.'\,'' Then the prophet Jeremiah
went his way. \bibleverse{12} Then Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, after
Hananiah the prophet had broken the bar from off the neck of the prophet
Jeremiah, saying, \bibleverse{13} ``Go, and tell Hananiah, saying,
`Yahweh says, ``You have broken the bars of wood, but you have made in
their place bars of iron.'' \bibleverse{14} For Yahweh of Armies, the
God of Israel says, ``I have put a yoke of iron on the neck of all these
nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they
will serve him. I have also given him the animals of the field.''\,'\,''
\bibleverse{15} Then the prophet Jeremiah said to Hananiah the prophet,
``Listen, Hananiah! Yahweh has not sent you, but you make this people
trust in a lie. \bibleverse{16} Therefore Yahweh says, `Behold, I will
send you away from off the surface of the earth. This year you will die,
because you have spoken rebellion against Yahweh.'\,'' \bibleverse{17}
So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-carta-de-jeremuxedas-a-los-juduxedos-encarcelados-en-babilonia-mal-resultado-de-dos-falsos-profetas-en-babilonia}{%
\subsection{La carta de Jeremías a los judíos encarcelados en Babilonia;
mal resultado de dos falsos profetas en
Babilonia}\label{la-carta-de-jeremuxedas-a-los-juduxedos-encarcelados-en-babilonia-mal-resultado-de-dos-falsos-profetas-en-babilonia}}

\hypertarget{section-56}{%
\section{29}\label{section-56}}

\bibleverse{1} Estas son las palabras de la carta que el profeta
Jeremías envió desde Jerusalén al resto de los ancianos de la
cautividad, a los sacerdotes, a los profetas y a todo el pueblo que
Nabucodonosor había llevado cautivo de Jerusalén a Babilonia,
\bibleverse{2} (después de que el rey Jeconías la reina madre, los
eunucos, los príncipes de Judá y de Jerusalén, los artesanos y los
herreros habían salido de Jerusalén), \footnote{\textbf{29:2} 2Re
  24,14-15} \bibleverse{3} por mano de Elasá hijo de Safán y de Gemarías
hijo de Hilcías, (a quienes Sedequías rey de Judá envió a Babilonia a
Nabucodonosor rey de Babilonia). Decía:

\hypertarget{texto-de-la-carta-de-jeremuxedas}{%
\subsection{Texto de la carta de
Jeremías}\label{texto-de-la-carta-de-jeremuxedas}}

\bibleverse{4} El Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice a
todos los cautivos que he hecho llevar de Jerusalén a Babilonia
\bibleverse{5} ``Construyan casas y habiten en ellas. Planten jardines y
coman sus frutos. \bibleverse{6} Tomen esposas y engendren hijos e
hijas. Tomen esposas para sus hijos, y den sus hijas a los maridos, para
que den a luz hijos e hijas. Multiplicaos allí, y no os dejéis
disminuir. \bibleverse{7} Buscad la paz de la ciudad donde os he hecho
cautivos, y rogad a Yahvé por ella, porque en su paz tendréis paz.''
\bibleverse{8} Porque Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
``No dejen que sus profetas que están entre ustedes y sus adivinos los
engañen. No escuchen sus sueños que hacen soñar. \footnote{\textbf{29:8}
  Jer 14,14} \bibleverse{9} Porque os profetizan falsamente en mi
nombre. Yo no los he enviado'', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{10} Porque Yahvé
dice: ``Después de que se cumplan setenta años para Babilonia, te
visitaré y cumpliré mi buena palabra para contigo, haciéndote volver a
este lugar. \footnote{\textbf{29:10} Jer 25,11-13} \bibleverse{11}
Porque yo sé los pensamientos que tengo para ti --- dice el Señor ---,
pensamientos de paz y no de mal, para darte esperanza y futuro.
\bibleverse{12} Me invocarás, e irás a orar a mí, y yo te escucharé.
\bibleverse{13} Me buscarás y me encontrarás, cuando me busques de todo
corazón. \footnote{\textbf{29:13} Deut 4,29; Is 55,6} \bibleverse{14}
Seré hallado por ti --- dice el Señor --- y haré volver tu cautiverio, y
te reuniré de todas las naciones y de todos los lugares a los que te he
expulsado, dice el Señor. Os haré volver al lugar de donde os hice salir
cautivos''. \footnote{\textbf{29:14} Sal 126,4}

\hypertarget{la-triste-situaciuxf3n-de-la-gente-que-se-queduxf3-en-jerusaluxe9n-insultar-a-dos-profetas-mentirosos-aduxfalteros-en-babilonia}{%
\subsection{La triste situación de la gente que se quedó en Jerusalén;
Insultar a dos profetas mentirosos adúlteros en
Babilonia}\label{la-triste-situaciuxf3n-de-la-gente-que-se-queduxf3-en-jerusaluxe9n-insultar-a-dos-profetas-mentirosos-aduxfalteros-en-babilonia}}

\bibleverse{15} Porque has dicho: ``Yahvé nos ha suscitado profetas en
Babilonia'', \bibleverse{16} Yahvé dice con respecto al rey que se
sienta en el trono de David, y con respecto a todo el pueblo que habita
en esta ciudad, tus hermanos que no han ido contigo al cautiverio,
\bibleverse{17} Yahvé de los Ejércitos dice: ``He aquí que yo envío
sobre ellos la espada, el hambre y la peste, y los pondré como higos
podridos que no se pueden comer, son tan malos. \footnote{\textbf{29:17}
  Jer 24,8} \bibleverse{18} Los perseguiré con la espada, con el hambre
y con la peste, y los entregaré para que sean zarandeados de un lado a
otro entre todos los reinos de la tierra, para que sean objeto de
horror, de asombro, de silbido y de oprobio entre todas las naciones a
las que los he expulsado, \footnote{\textbf{29:18} Jer 24,9-10}
\bibleverse{19} porque no han escuchado mis palabras --- dice Yahvé ---
con las que les envié a mis siervos los profetas, madrugando y
enviándolos; pero no quisieron escuchar'', dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{29:19}
  Jer 25,4} \bibleverse{20} Oíd, pues, la palabra de Yahvé, todos los
cautivos que he enviado de Jerusalén a Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{29:20}
  Jer 29,4} \bibleverse{21} El Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de
Israel, dice sobre Ajab, hijo de Colaías, y sobre Sedequías, hijo de
Maasías, que os profetizan una mentira en mi nombre: ``He aquí que yo
los entregaré en manos de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, y él los
matará ante vuestros ojos. \footnote{\textbf{29:21} Jer 29,8}
\bibleverse{22} Una maldición será levantada sobre ellos por todos los
cautivos de Judá que están en Babilonia, diciendo: `Que el Señor te haga
como Sedequías y como Acab, a quienes el rey de Babilonia asó en el
fuego'; \bibleverse{23} porque han hecho cosas insensatas en Israel, y
han cometido adulterio con las mujeres de sus vecinos, y han dicho en mi
nombre palabras falsas, que yo no les mandé. Yo soy el que sabe, y soy
testigo'', dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{la-queja-de-semaja-sobre-la-carta-de-jeremuxedas-al-sacerdocio-en-jerusaluxe9n-el-castigo-amenazado-por-dios}{%
\subsection{La queja de Semaja sobre la carta de Jeremías al sacerdocio
en Jerusalén; el castigo amenazado por
dios}\label{la-queja-de-semaja-sobre-la-carta-de-jeremuxedas-al-sacerdocio-en-jerusaluxe9n-el-castigo-amenazado-por-dios}}

\bibleverse{24} Sobre Semaías el nehelamita hablarás diciendo:
\bibleverse{25} ``Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
Porque has enviado cartas en tu nombre a todo el pueblo que está en
Jerusalén, y a Sofonías hijo de Maasías, el sacerdote y a todos los
sacerdotes, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{29:25} Jer 21,1; 2Re 25,18}
\bibleverse{26} ``Yahvé te ha hecho sacerdote en lugar del sacerdote
Joiada, para que haya oficiales en la casa de Yahvé, para que todo
hombre que esté loco y se haga profeta, lo pongas en el cepo y en los
grilletes. \footnote{\textbf{29:26} Os 9,7} \bibleverse{27} Ahora bien,
¿por qué no habéis reprendido a Jeremías de Anatot, que se hace profeta
para vosotros, \bibleverse{28} porque nos ha enviado a Babilonia,
diciendo: La cautividad es larga. Construid casas, y habitad en ellas.
Plantad jardines, y comed su fruto''\,''.

\bibleverse{29} El sacerdote Sofonías leyó esta carta a oídos del
profeta Jeremías. \bibleverse{30} Entonces llegó la palabra de Yavé a
Jeremías, diciendo: \bibleverse{31} ``Envía a todos los cautivos,
diciendo: `Dice Yavé acerca de Semaías el nehelamita: ``Porque Semaías
os ha profetizado, y yo no lo he enviado, y os ha hecho confiar en una
mentira'', \bibleverse{32} Por eso Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que yo
castigaré a Semaías el nehelamita y a su descendencia. No tendrá un
hombre que habite entre este pueblo. No verá el bien que haré a mi
pueblo --- dice el Señor --- porque ha hablado con rebeldía contra el
Señor''. \footnote{\textbf{29:32} Jer 28,16}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-letter-to-the-jews-imprisoned-in-babylon-bad-result-of-two-false-prophets-in-babylon}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's letter to the Jews imprisoned in Babylon; bad
result of two false prophets in
Babylon}\label{jeremiahs-letter-to-the-jews-imprisoned-in-babylon-bad-result-of-two-false-prophets-in-babylon}}

\hypertarget{section-57}{%
\section{29}\label{section-57}}

\bibleverse{1} Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the
prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the elders of the
captivity, and to the priests, to the prophets, and to all the people
whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon,
\bibleverse{2} (after Jeconiah the king, the queen mother, the eunuchs,
the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, the craftsmen, and the smiths had
departed from Jerusalem), \bibleverse{3} by the hand of Elasah the son
of Shaphan and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah
sent to Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon). It said: i1

\hypertarget{text-of-jeremiahs-letter}{%
\subsection{Text of Jeremiah's letter}\label{text-of-jeremiahs-letter}}

\bibleverse{4} Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says to all the
captives whom I have caused to be carried away captive from Jerusalem to
Babylon: \bibleverse{5} ``Build houses and dwell in them. Plant gardens
and eat their fruit. \bibleverse{6} Take wives and father sons and
daughters. Take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to
husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters. Multiply there, and
don't be diminished. \bibleverse{7} Seek the peace of the city where I
have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray to Yahweh for it;
for in its peace you will have peace.'' \bibleverse{8} For Yahweh of
Armies, the God of Israel says: ``Don't let your prophets who are among
you and your diviners deceive you. Don't listen to your dreams which you
cause to be dreamed. \bibleverse{9} For they prophesy falsely to you in
my name. I have not sent them,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{10} For Yahweh
says, ``After seventy years are accomplished for Babylon, I will visit
you and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to
this place. \bibleverse{11} For I know the thoughts that I think toward
you,'' says Yahweh, ``thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you
hope and a future. \bibleverse{12} You shall call on me, and you shall
go and pray to me, and I will listen to you. \bibleverse{13} You shall
seek me and find me, when you search for me with all your heart.
\bibleverse{14} I will be found by you,'' says Yahweh, ``and I will turn
again your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and
from all the places where I have driven you, says Yahweh. I will bring
you again to the place from where I caused you to be carried away
captive.'' i1

\hypertarget{the-sad-situation-of-the-people-who-remained-in-jerusalem-insult-two-lying-adulterous-prophets-in-babylon}{%
\subsection{The sad situation of the people who remained in Jerusalem;
Insult two lying adulterous prophets in
Babylon}\label{the-sad-situation-of-the-people-who-remained-in-jerusalem-insult-two-lying-adulterous-prophets-in-babylon}}

\bibleverse{15} Because you have said, ``Yahweh has raised us up
prophets in Babylon,'' \bibleverse{16} Yahweh says concerning the king
who sits on David's throne, and concerning all the people who dwell in
this city, your brothers who haven't gone with you into captivity,
\bibleverse{17} Yahweh of Armies says: ``Behold, I will send on them the
sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like rotten
figs that can't be eaten, they are so bad. \bibleverse{18} I will pursue
after them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and
will deliver them to be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of
the earth, to be an object of horror, an astonishment, a hissing, and a
reproach among all the nations where I have driven them, \bibleverse{19}
because they have not listened to my words,'' says Yahweh, ``with which
I sent to them my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending
them; but you would not hear,'' says Yahweh. i1 \bibleverse{20} Hear
therefore Yahweh's word, all you captives whom I have sent away from
Jerusalem to Babylon. \bibleverse{21} Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, says concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah
the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name: ``Behold, I
will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and
he will kill them before your eyes. \bibleverse{22} A curse will be
taken up about them by all the captives of Judah who are in Babylon,
saying, `Yahweh make you like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of
Babylon roasted in the fire;' \bibleverse{23} because they have done
foolish things in Israel, and have committed adultery with their
neighbors' wives, and have spoken words in my name falsely, which I
didn't command them. I am he who knows, and am witness,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{semajas-complaint-about-jeremiahs-letter-to-the-priesthood-in-jerusalem-the-punishment-threatened-by-god}{%
\subsection{Semaja's complaint about Jeremiah's letter to the priesthood
in Jerusalem; the punishment threatened by
god}\label{semajas-complaint-about-jeremiahs-letter-to-the-priesthood-in-jerusalem-the-punishment-threatened-by-god}}

\bibleverse{24} Concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite you shall speak,
saying, \bibleverse{25} ``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says,
`Because you have sent letters in your own name to all the people who
are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, and
to all the priests, saying, \bibleverse{26} ``Yahweh has made you priest
in the place of Jehoiada the priest, that there may be officers in
Yahweh's house, for every man who is crazy and makes himself a prophet,
that you should put him in the stocks and in shackles. \bibleverse{27}
Now therefore, why have you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth, who makes
himself a prophet to you, \bibleverse{28} because he has sent to us in
Babylon, saying, The captivity is long. Build houses, and dwell in them.
Plant gardens, and eat their fruit?''\,'\,'' \bibleverse{29} Zephaniah
the priest read this letter in the hearing of Jeremiah the prophet.
\bibleverse{30} Then Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, saying,
\bibleverse{31} ``Send to all of the captives, saying, `Yahweh says
concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: ``Because Shemaiah has prophesied to
you, and I didn't send him, and he has caused you to trust in a lie,''
\bibleverse{32} therefore Yahweh says, ``Behold, I will punish Shemaiah
the Nehelamite and his offspring. He will not have a man to dwell among
this people. He won't see the good that I will do to my people,'' says
Yahweh, ``because he has spoken rebellion against Yahweh.''\,'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{introducciuxf3n-jeremuxedas-debe-registrar-todas-las-palabras-de-dios-que-le-han-llegado}{%
\subsection{Introducción: Jeremías debe registrar todas las palabras de
Dios que le han
llegado}\label{introducciuxf3n-jeremuxedas-debe-registrar-todas-las-palabras-de-dios-que-le-han-llegado}}

\hypertarget{section-58}{%
\section{30}\label{section-58}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé, diciendo:
\bibleverse{2} ``Dice Yavé, el Dios de Israel: `Escribe en un libro
todas las palabras que te he dicho. \bibleverse{3} Porque he aquí que
vienen días --- dice Yavé --- en que haré retroceder la cautividad de mi
pueblo Israel y Judá --- dice Yavé. `Haré que vuelvan a la tierra que di
a sus padres, y la poseerán'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{30:3} Jer 29,14}

\hypertarget{el-terrible-punto-de-inflexiuxf3n}{%
\subsection{El terrible punto de
inflexión}\label{el-terrible-punto-de-inflexiuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{4} Estas son las palabras que Yahvé habló sobre Israel y
sobre Judá. \bibleverse{5} Porque Yahvé dice: ``Hemos oído una voz
temblorosa; una voz de miedo, y no de paz. \bibleverse{6} Preguntad
ahora y ved si un hombre está de parto. Por qué veo a todos los hombres
con las manos en la cintura, como una mujer de parto, y todos los
rostros se vuelven pálidos? \footnote{\textbf{30:6} Is 13,8}
\bibleverse{7} ¡Ay, porque ese día es grande, de modo que no hay ninguno
como él! Es incluso el tiempo de la angustia de Jacob; pero se salvará
de ello. \footnote{\textbf{30:7} Jl 2,11; Sof 1,15}

\hypertarget{redenciuxf3n-de-problemas}{%
\subsection{Redención de problemas}\label{redenciuxf3n-de-problemas}}

\bibleverse{8} Sucederá en ese día, dice el Señor de los Ejércitos, que
romperé su yugo de tu cuello, y romperá tus ataduras. Los extraños ya no
los convertirán en sus siervos; \footnote{\textbf{30:8} Jer 27,12}
\bibleverse{9} sino que servirán a Yahvé, su Dios, y David su rey, a
quien yo les levantaré. \footnote{\textbf{30:9} Jer 23,5; Ezeq 34,23}
\bibleverse{10} No temas, pues, siervo mío Jacob, dice Yahvé. No te
desanimes, Israel. Porque, he aquí que yo te salvaré desde lejos, y
salva a tu descendencia de la tierra de su cautiverio. Jacob volverá, y
estará tranquilo y a gusto. Nadie le hará tener miedo. \footnote{\textbf{30:10}
  Jer 46,27; Is 44,2} \bibleverse{11} Porque yo estoy con ustedes, dice
Yahvé, para salvarlos; porque voy a acabar por completo con todas las
naciones en las que os he dispersado, pero no haré un final completo de
ti; pero te corregiré en la medida, y de ninguna manera te dejará
impune''. \footnote{\textbf{30:11} Jer 10,24}

\hypertarget{la-cauxedda-de-israel-como-resultado-de-sus-pecados}{%
\subsection{La caída de Israel como resultado de sus
pecados}\label{la-cauxedda-de-israel-como-resultado-de-sus-pecados}}

\bibleverse{12} Porque Yahvé dice, ``Tu herida es incurable. Tu herida
es grave. \footnote{\textbf{30:12} Jer 15,18} \bibleverse{13} No hay
nadie que defienda tu causa, para que te aten. No tienes medicinas
curativas. \bibleverse{14} Todos tus amantes te han olvidado. No te
buscan. Porque te he herido con la herida de un enemigo, con el castigo
de un cruel, por la grandeza de tu iniquidad, porque tus pecados fueron
aumentados. \bibleverse{15} ¿Por qué lloras por tu lesión? Su dolor es
incurable. Por la grandeza de tu iniquidad, porque tus pecados han
aumentado, Te he hecho estas cosas.

\hypertarget{la-restauraciuxf3n-del-pueblo-y-el-pauxeds}{%
\subsection{La restauración del pueblo y el
país}\label{la-restauraciuxf3n-del-pueblo-y-el-pauxeds}}

\bibleverse{16} Por lo tanto, todos los que te devoran serán devorados.
Todos tus adversarios, todos ellos, irán al cautiverio. Los que te
saquean serán saqueados. Haré que todos los que se aprovechan de ti se
conviertan en presa. \footnote{\textbf{30:16} Is 33,1} \bibleverse{17}
Porque yo te devolveré la salud, y te curaré de tus heridas'', dice
Yahvé, ``porque te han llamado paria, diciendo: ``Es Sión, a quien nadie
busca''. \footnote{\textbf{30:17} Jer 33,6}

\bibleverse{18} Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que voy a revertir el cautiverio
de las tiendas de Jacob, y ten compasión de sus moradas. La ciudad se
construirá en su propia colina, y el palacio será habitado en su propio
lugar. \footnote{\textbf{30:18} Jer 30,3} \bibleverse{19} La acción de
gracias saldrá de elloscon la voz de los que se alegran. Los
multiplicaré, y no serán pocos; También los glorificaré, y no serán
pequeños. \bibleverse{20} Sus hijos también serán como antes, y su
congregación se establecerá ante mí. Castigaré a todos los que los
opriman. \bibleverse{21} Su príncipe será uno de ellos, y su gobernante
saldrá de entre ellos. Haré que se acerque, y se acercará a mí; porque
¿quién es el que ha tenido la osadía de acercarse a mí?'', dice Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{30:21} Jer 30,9} \bibleverse{22} ``Vosotros seréis mi
pueblo, y yo seré tu Dios. \footnote{\textbf{30:22} Jer 24,7}
\bibleverse{23} He aquí que la tormenta de Yahvé, su ira, ha salido, una
tormenta arrolladora; estallará en la cabeza de los malvados.
\footnote{\textbf{30:23} Jer 23,19} \bibleverse{24} La feroz ira de
Yahvé no volverá hasta que haya cumplido, y hasta que haya realizado las
intenciones de su corazón. En los últimos días lo entenderás''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{introduction-jeremiah-must-record-all-the-words-of-god-that-have-come-to-him}{%
\subsection{Introduction: Jeremiah must record all the words of God that
have come to
him}\label{introduction-jeremiah-must-record-all-the-words-of-god-that-have-come-to-him}}

\hypertarget{section-59}{%
\section{30}\label{section-59}}

\bibleverse{1} The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, `Write all the words
that I have spoken to you in a book. \bibleverse{3} For, behold, the
days come,' says Yahweh, `that I will reverse the captivity of my people
Israel and Judah,' says Yahweh. `I will cause them to return to the land
that I gave to their fathers, and they will possess it.'\,''

\hypertarget{the-terrible-turning-point}{%
\subsection{The terrible turning
point}\label{the-terrible-turning-point}}

\bibleverse{4} These are the words that Yahweh spoke concerning Israel
and concerning Judah. \bibleverse{5} For Yahweh says: ``We have heard a
voice of trembling; a voice of fear, and not of peace. \bibleverse{6}
Ask now, and see whether a man travails with child. Why do I see every
man with his hands on his waist, as a woman in travail, and all faces
are turned pale? \bibleverse{7} Alas, for that day is great, so that
none is like it! It is even the time of Jacob's trouble; but he will be
saved out of it.

\hypertarget{trouble-redemption}{%
\subsection{Trouble Redemption}\label{trouble-redemption}}

\bibleverse{8} It will come to pass in that day, says Yahweh of Armies,
that I will break his yoke from off your neck, and will burst your
bonds. Strangers will no more make them their bondservants;
\bibleverse{9} but they will serve Yahweh their God, and David their
king, whom I will raise up to them. \bibleverse{10} Therefore don't be
afraid, O Jacob my servant, says Yahweh. Don't be dismayed, Israel. For,
behold, I will save you from afar, and save your offspring from the land
of their captivity. Jacob will return, and will be quiet and at ease. No
one will make him afraid. \bibleverse{11} For I am with you, says
Yahweh, to save you; for I will make a full end of all the nations where
I have scattered you, but I will not make a full end of you; but I will
correct you in measure, and will in no way leave you unpunished.''

\hypertarget{the-fall-of-israel-as-a-result-of-their-sins}{%
\subsection{The fall of Israel as a result of their
sins}\label{the-fall-of-israel-as-a-result-of-their-sins}}

\bibleverse{12} For Yahweh says, ``Your hurt is incurable. Your wound is
grievous. \bibleverse{13} There is no one to plead your cause, that you
may be bound up. You have no healing medicines. \bibleverse{14} All your
lovers have forgotten you. They don't seek you. For I have wounded you
with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for
the greatness of your iniquity, because your sins were increased.
\bibleverse{15} Why do you cry over your injury? Your pain is incurable.
For the greatness of your iniquity, because your sins have increased, I
have done these things to you.

\hypertarget{the-restoration-of-the-people-and-the-country}{%
\subsection{The restoration of the people and the
country}\label{the-restoration-of-the-people-and-the-country}}

\bibleverse{16} Therefore all those who devour you will be devoured. All
your adversaries, everyone of them, will go into captivity. Those who
plunder you will be plunder. I will make all who prey on you become
prey. \bibleverse{17} For I will restore health to you, and I will heal
you of your wounds,'' says Yahweh, ``because they have called you an
outcast, saying, `It is Zion, whom no man seeks after.'\,''
\bibleverse{18} Yahweh says: ``Behold, I will reverse the captivity of
Jacob's tents, and have compassion on his dwelling places. The city will
be built on its own hill, and the palace will be inhabited in its own
place. \bibleverse{19} Thanksgiving will proceed out of them with the
voice of those who make merry. I will multiply them, and they will not
be few; I will also glorify them, and they will not be small.
\bibleverse{20} Their children also will be as before, and their
congregation will be established before me. I will punish all who
oppress them. \bibleverse{21} Their prince will be one of them, and
their ruler will proceed from among them. I will cause him to draw near,
and he will approach me; for who is he who has had boldness to approach
me?'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{22} ``You shall be my people, and I will
be your God. \bibleverse{23} Behold, Yahweh's storm, his wrath, has gone
out, a sweeping storm; it will burst on the head of the wicked.
\bibleverse{24} The fierce anger of Yahweh will not return until he has
accomplished, and until he has performed the intentions of his heart. In
the latter days you will understand it.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-encuentro-de-dios-e-israel-en-el-desierto-las-esperanzadas-palabras-de-saludo}{%
\subsection{El encuentro de Dios e Israel en el desierto; las
esperanzadas palabras de
saludo}\label{el-encuentro-de-dios-e-israel-en-el-desierto-las-esperanzadas-palabras-de-saludo}}

\hypertarget{section-60}{%
\section{31}\label{section-60}}

\bibleverse{1} ``En aquel tiempo'', dice Yahvé, ``seré el Dios de todas
las familias de Israel, y ellas serán mi pueblo''. \footnote{\textbf{31:1}
  Jer 31,33; Jer 24,7}

\bibleverse{2} Dice Yahvé: ``El pueblo que sobrevive a la espada
encontró favor en el desierto; también Israel, cuando fui a hacerlo
descansar''.

\bibleverse{3} Yahvé se me apareció de antiguo, diciendo, ``Sí, te he
amado con un amor eterno. Por eso te he atraído con amorosa bondad.
\bibleverse{4} Te construiré de nuevo, y serás edificada, oh virgen de
Israel. Volverán a adornarse con sus panderetas, y saldrá en los bailes
de los que se alegran. \bibleverse{5} De nuevo plantarás viñas en los
montes de Samaria. Los plantadores plantarán, y disfrutará de sus
frutos. \bibleverse{6} Porque habrá un día en que los vigías de las
colinas de Efraín gritarán,`¡Levántate! Subamos a Sión, a Yahvé nuestro
Dios'\,''.

\hypertarget{el-regreso-a-casa}{%
\subsection{El regreso a casa}\label{el-regreso-a-casa}}

\bibleverse{7} Porque Yahvé dice, ``Canta con alegría por Jacob, y
gritar por el jefe de las naciones. Publicar, alabar y decir,`Yahvé,
salva a tu pueblo, el remanente de Israel''. \bibleverse{8} He aquí que
los traeré del país del norte, y reunirlos de los confines de la tierra,
junto con los ciegos y los cojos, la mujer embarazada y la que está de
parto juntas. Volverán a ser una gran empresa. \footnote{\textbf{31:8}
  Is 35,8-10} \bibleverse{9} Vendrán con llanto. Los guiaré con
peticiones. Les haré caminar junto a ríos de aguas, en un camino recto
en el que no tropezarán; porque soy un padre para Israel. Efraín es mi
primogénito. \footnote{\textbf{31:9} 2Cor 6,18}

\hypertarget{en-la-patria}{%
\subsection{En la patria}\label{en-la-patria}}

\bibleverse{10} ``Escuchen la palabra de Yahvé, naciones, y declararlo
en las islas lejanas. Di, El que dispersó a Israel lo reunirá, y lo
guardará, como el pastor a su rebaño''. \bibleverse{11} Porque Yahvé ha
rescatado a Jacob, y lo redujo de la mano del que era más fuerte que él.
\bibleverse{12} Vendrán a cantar en la altura de Sión, y fluirá hacia la
bondad de Yahvé, al grano, al vino nuevo, al aceite, y a las crías del
rebaño y de la manada. Su alma será como un jardín regado. Ya no se
apenarán en absoluto. \footnote{\textbf{31:12} Is 58,11} \bibleverse{13}
Entonces la virgen se regocijará en la danza, los jóvenes y los viejos
juntos; porque convertiré su llanto en alegría, y los consolará, y hará
que se alegren de su dolor. \bibleverse{14} Saciaré de grasa el alma de
los sacerdotes, y mi pueblo se saciará de mi bondad'', dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{raquel-llora-por-sus-hijos-y-dios-la-consuela}{%
\subsection{Raquel llora por sus hijos y Dios la
consuela}\label{raquel-llora-por-sus-hijos-y-dios-la-consuela}}

\bibleverse{15} Yahvé dice: ``Se oye una voz en Ramah, lamento y llanto
amargo, Raquel llorando por sus hijos. Se niega a ser consolada por sus
hijos, porque ya no existen''. \footnote{\textbf{31:15} Mat 2,18}

\bibleverse{16} Yahvé dice: ``Absténgase de llorar, y tus ojos de las
lágrimas, porque tu trabajo será recompensado'', dice Yahvé. ``Volverán
a venir de la tierra del enemigo. \bibleverse{17} Hay esperanza para tu
fin último'', dice Yahvé. ``Tus hijos volverán a su territorio.

\hypertarget{el-arrepentimiento-de-efrauxedn-y-la-gracia-de-dios}{%
\subsection{El arrepentimiento de Efraín y la gracia de
Dios}\label{el-arrepentimiento-de-efrauxedn-y-la-gracia-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{18} ``Ciertamente he oído a Efraín afligirse así,`Me has
castigado, y fui castigado, como un ternero no entrenado. Gíreme, y seré
girado, porque tú eres Yahvé, mi Dios. \bibleverse{19} Ciertamente,
después de eso me convertí. Me arrepiento. Después de eso se me
instruyó. Me golpeé el muslo. Estaba avergonzado, sí, incluso
confundido, porque he llevado el reproche de mi juventud'.
\bibleverse{20} ¿Es Efraín mi hijo querido? ¿Es un niño encantador? Ya
que por más que hable en contra de él, Todavía lo recuerdo con cariño.
Por eso mi corazón lo anhela. Seguramente tendré misericordia de él'',
dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{31:20} Is 49,15; Os 11,8}

\hypertarget{el-llamado-de-dios-a-israel-para-que-regrese}{%
\subsection{El llamado de Dios a Israel para que
regrese}\label{el-llamado-de-dios-a-israel-para-que-regrese}}

\bibleverse{21} ``Poner señales de tráfico. Haga postes de guía. Pon tu
corazón hacia la carretera, incluso el camino por el que te fuiste.
Vuélvete, virgen de Israel. Volved a estas vuestras ciudades.
\bibleverse{22} Cuanto tiempo vas a ir aquí y allá, ¿te has desviado,
hija? Porque Yahvé ha creado algo nuevo en la tierra: una mujer abarcará
a un hombre''.

\hypertarget{la-bendiciuxf3n-de-dios-sobre-el-regreso-de-los-esparcidos}{%
\subsection{La bendición de Dios sobre el regreso de los
esparcidos}\label{la-bendiciuxf3n-de-dios-sobre-el-regreso-de-los-esparcidos}}

\bibleverse{23} El Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
``Todavía usarán este discurso en la tierra de Judá y en sus ciudades,
cuando yo revierta su cautiverio: `El Señor te bendiga, morada de
justicia, montaña de santidad'. \bibleverse{24} Judá y todas sus
ciudades habitarán en ella, los agricultores y los que van con rebaños.
\bibleverse{25} Porque he saciado el alma cansada, y he llenado toda
alma afligida''. \footnote{\textbf{31:25} Mat 11,28}

\bibleverse{26} En esto me desperté y vi, y mi sueño fue dulce para mí.

\hypertarget{dios-quiere-construir-y-plantar}{%
\subsection{Dios quiere construir y
plantar}\label{dios-quiere-construir-y-plantar}}

\bibleverse{27} ``He aquí que vienen días --- dice Yahvé --- en que
sembraré la casa de Israel y la casa de Judá con semilla de hombre y con
semilla de animal. \bibleverse{28} Sucederá que, así como he velado por
ellos para arrancar y derribar y destruir y afligir, así velaré por
ellos para edificar y plantar'', dice el Señor.

\hypertarget{el-proverbio-sobre-los-uvas-agraces-deberuxeda-quedar-fuera-de-uso}{%
\subsection{El proverbio sobre los uvas agraces debería quedar fuera de
uso}\label{el-proverbio-sobre-los-uvas-agraces-deberuxeda-quedar-fuera-de-uso}}

\bibleverse{29} ``En esos días no dirán más, ``\,`Los padres han comido
uvas agrias', y los dientes de los niños se ponen de punta''.
\footnote{\textbf{31:29} Lam 5,7; Ezeq 18,2} \bibleverse{30} Pero cada
uno morirá por su propia iniquidad. A todo hombre que coma las uvas
agrias, se le pondrán los dientes de punta.

\hypertarget{el-nuevo-pacto-de-gracia-con-ambas-casas-de-israel}{%
\subsection{El nuevo pacto de gracia con ambas casas de
Israel}\label{el-nuevo-pacto-de-gracia-con-ambas-casas-de-israel}}

\bibleverse{31} ``He aquí que vienen días --- dice Yahvé --- en que haré
un nuevo pacto con la casa de Israel y con la casa de Judá, \footnote{\textbf{31:31}
  Heb 8,8-12} \bibleverse{32} no según el pacto que hice con sus padres
el día en que los tomé de la mano para sacarlos de la tierra de Egipto,
pacto que ellos rompieron, a pesar de que yo era un esposo para ellos
--- dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{33} ``Pero éste es el pacto que haré con la
casa de Israel después de aquellos días --- dice el Señor: ``Pondré mi
ley en su interior, y lo escribiré en su corazón. Yo seré su Dios, y
serán mi pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{31:33} Rom 11,27; Is 54,13; Heb
  10,16-17} \bibleverse{34} Ya no enseñarán cada uno a su vecino, y cada
uno enseñe a su hermano diciendo: ``Conoce a Yahvé''. porque todos me
conocerán, desde el más pequeño hasta el más grande'', dice Yahvé,
``porque perdonaré su iniquidad, y no recordaré más su pecado''.
\footnote{\textbf{31:34} Jer 33,8; Is 43,25}

\hypertarget{la-eterna-existencia-de-la-salvaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{La eterna existencia de la
salvación}\label{la-eterna-existencia-de-la-salvaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{35} Yahvé, que da el sol como luz del día, y las ordenanzas
de la luna y de las estrellas para alumbrar la noche, que agita el mar,
de modo que sus olas rugen... Yahvé de los Ejércitos es su nombre, dice:
\bibleverse{36} ``Si estas ordenanzas se apartan de delante de mí'',
dice Yahvé, ``entonces la descendencia de Israel también dejará de ser
una nación ante mí para siempre''. \footnote{\textbf{31:36} Jer 33,25;
  Rom 11,1} \bibleverse{37} Yahvé dice: ``Si el cielo de arriba se puede
medir, y los cimientos de la tierra buscados por debajo, entonces
también expulsaré a toda la descendencia de Israel por todo lo que han
hecho'', dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{restaurar-jerusaluxe9n-a-una-ciudad-perfectamente-santa}{%
\subsection{Restaurar Jerusalén a una ciudad perfectamente
santa}\label{restaurar-jerusaluxe9n-a-una-ciudad-perfectamente-santa}}

\bibleverse{38} ``He aquí que vienen días --- dice Yavé --- en que la
ciudad será edificada para Yavé desde la torre de Hananel hasta la
puerta de la esquina. \footnote{\textbf{31:38} Zac 14,10}
\bibleverse{39} La línea de medición saldrá en línea recta hacia el
cerro Gareb, y girará hacia Goah. \bibleverse{40} Todo el valle de los
cadáveres y de las cenizas, y todos los campos hasta el arroyo Cedrón,
hasta la esquina de la puerta de los caballos hacia el oriente, serán
sagrados para Yavé. No se arrancará ni se derribará nunca más''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-meeting-of-god-and-israel-in-the-desert-the-hopeful-words-of-greeting}{%
\subsection{The meeting of God and Israel in the desert; the hopeful
words of
greeting}\label{the-meeting-of-god-and-israel-in-the-desert-the-hopeful-words-of-greeting}}

\hypertarget{section-61}{%
\section{31}\label{section-61}}

\bibleverse{1} ``At that time,'' says Yahweh, ``I will be the God of all
the families of Israel, and they will be my people.'' \bibleverse{2}
Yahweh says, ``The people who survive the sword found favor in the
wilderness; even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.''
\bibleverse{3} Yahweh appeared of old to me, saying, ``Yes, I have loved
you with an everlasting love. Therefore I have drawn you with loving
kindness. \bibleverse{4} I will build you again, and you will be built,
O virgin of Israel. You will again be adorned with your tambourines, and
will go out in the dances of those who make merry. \bibleverse{5} Again
you will plant vineyards on the mountains of Samaria. The planters will
plant, and will enjoy its fruit. \bibleverse{6} For there will be a day
that the watchmen on the hills of Ephraim cry, `Arise! Let's go up to
Zion to Yahweh our God.'\,''

\hypertarget{homecoming}{%
\subsection{Homecoming}\label{homecoming}}

\bibleverse{7} For Yahweh says, ``Sing with gladness for Jacob, and
shout for the chief of the nations. Publish, praise, and say, `Yahweh,
save your people, the remnant of Israel!' \bibleverse{8} Behold, I will
bring them from the north country, and gather them from the uttermost
parts of the earth, along with the blind and the lame, the woman with
child and her who travails with child together. They will return as a
great company. \bibleverse{9} They will come with weeping. I will lead
them with petitions. I will cause them to walk by rivers of waters, in a
straight way in which they won't stumble; for I am a father to Israel.
Ephraim is my firstborn.

\hypertarget{in-the-motherland}{%
\subsection{In the motherland}\label{in-the-motherland}}

\bibleverse{10} ``Hear Yahweh's word, you nations, and declare it in the
distant islands. Say, `He who scattered Israel will gather him, and keep
him, as a shepherd does his flock.' \bibleverse{11} For Yahweh has
ransomed Jacob, and redeemed him from the hand of him who was stronger
than he. \bibleverse{12} They will come and sing in the height of Zion,
and will flow to the goodness of Yahweh, to the grain, to the new wine,
to the oil, and to the young of the flock and of the herd. Their soul
will be as a watered garden. They will not sorrow any more at all.
\bibleverse{13} Then the virgin will rejoice in the dance, the young men
and the old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will
comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow. \bibleverse{14} I
will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people will be
satisfied with my goodness,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{raquel-cries-for-her-children-and-god-comforts-her}{%
\subsection{Raquel cries for her children and God comforts
her}\label{raquel-cries-for-her-children-and-god-comforts-her}}

\bibleverse{15} Yahweh says: ``A voice is heard in Ramah, lamentation
and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children. She refuses to be
comforted for her children, because they are no more.'' \bibleverse{16}
Yahweh says: ``Refrain your voice from weeping, and your eyes from
tears, for your work will be rewarded,'' says Yahweh. ``They will come
again from the land of the enemy. \bibleverse{17} There is hope for your
latter end,'' says Yahweh. ``Your children will come again to their own
territory.

\hypertarget{ephraims-repentance-and-gods-grace}{%
\subsection{Ephraim's repentance and God's
grace}\label{ephraims-repentance-and-gods-grace}}

\bibleverse{18} ``I have surely heard Ephraim grieving thus, `You have
chastised me, and I was chastised, as an untrained calf. Turn me, and I
will be turned, for you are Yahweh my God. \bibleverse{19} Surely after
that I was turned. I repented. After that I was instructed. I struck my
thigh. I was ashamed, yes, even confounded, because I bore the reproach
of my youth.' \bibleverse{20} Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a darling
child? For as often as I speak against him, I still earnestly remember
him. Therefore my heart yearns for him. I will surely have mercy on
him,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{gods-call-to-israel-to-return}{%
\subsection{God's call to Israel to
return}\label{gods-call-to-israel-to-return}}

\bibleverse{21} ``Set up road signs. Make guideposts. Set your heart
toward the highway, even the way by which you went. Turn again, virgin
of Israel. Turn again to these your cities. \bibleverse{22} How long
will you go here and there, you backsliding daughter? For Yahweh has
created a new thing in the earth: a woman will encompass a man.''

\hypertarget{gods-blessing-on-the-return-of-the-scattered}{%
\subsection{God's blessing on the return of the
scattered}\label{gods-blessing-on-the-return-of-the-scattered}}

\bibleverse{23} Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ``Yet again
they will use this speech in the land of Judah and in its cities, when I
reverse their captivity: `Yahweh bless you, habitation of righteousness,
mountain of holiness.' \bibleverse{24} Judah and all its cities will
dwell therein together, the farmers, and those who go about with flocks.
\bibleverse{25} For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have
replenished every sorrowful soul.'' \bibleverse{26} On this I awakened,
and saw; and my sleep was sweet to me.

\hypertarget{god-wants-to-build-and-plant}{%
\subsection{God wants to build and
plant}\label{god-wants-to-build-and-plant}}

\bibleverse{27} ``Behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will
sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and
with the seed of animal. \bibleverse{28} It will happen that, like as I
have watched over them to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow
and to destroy and to afflict, so I will watch over them to build and to
plant,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{the-proverb-about-sour-grapes-should-be-deprecated}{%
\subsection{The proverb about sour grapes should be
deprecated}\label{the-proverb-about-sour-grapes-should-be-deprecated}}

\bibleverse{29} ``In those days they will say no more, ``\,`The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge.'
\bibleverse{30} But everyone will die for his own iniquity. Every man
who eats the sour grapes, his teeth will be set on edge.

\hypertarget{the-new-covenant-of-grace-with-both-houses-of-israel}{%
\subsection{The new covenant of grace with both houses of
Israel}\label{the-new-covenant-of-grace-with-both-houses-of-israel}}

\bibleverse{31} ``Behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will
make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Judah, \bibleverse{32} not according to the covenant that I made with
their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out
of the land of Egypt, which covenant of mine they broke, although I was
a husband to them,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{33} ``But this is the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,''
says Yahweh: ``I will put my law in their inward parts, and I will write
it in their heart. I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
\bibleverse{34} They will no longer each teach his neighbor, and every
man teach his brother, saying, `Know Yahweh;' for they will all know me,
from their least to their greatest,'' says Yahweh, ``for I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.''

\hypertarget{the-eternal-existence-of-salvation}{%
\subsection{The eternal existence of
salvation}\label{the-eternal-existence-of-salvation}}

\bibleverse{35} Yahweh, who gives the sun for a light by day, and the
ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, who stirs
up the sea, so that its waves roar--- Yahweh of Armies is his name,
says: \bibleverse{36} ``If these ordinances depart from before me,''
says Yahweh, ``then the offspring of Israel also will cease from being a
nation before me forever.'' \bibleverse{37} Yahweh says: ``If heaven
above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out
beneath, then I will also cast off all the offspring of Israel for all
that they have done,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{restore-jerusalem-to-a-perfectly-holy-city}{%
\subsection{Restore Jerusalem to a perfectly holy
city}\label{restore-jerusalem-to-a-perfectly-holy-city}}

\bibleverse{38} ``Behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that the city
will be built to Yahweh from the tower of Hananel to the gate of the
corner. \bibleverse{39} The measuring line will go out further straight
onward to the hill Gareb, and will turn toward Goah. \bibleverse{40} The
whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes, and all the fields to
the brook Kidron, to the corner of the horse gate toward the east, will
be holy to Yahweh. It will not be plucked up or thrown down any more
forever.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{como-prisionero-jeremuxedas-compra-un-campo-en-anatot-seguxfan-la-direcciuxf3n-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Como prisionero, Jeremías compra un campo en Anatot según la
dirección de
Dios}\label{como-prisionero-jeremuxedas-compra-un-campo-en-anatot-seguxfan-la-direcciuxf3n-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-62}{%
\section{32}\label{section-62}}

\bibleverse{1} Esta es la palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé
en el décimo año de Sedequías, rey de Judá, que era el año dieciocho de
Nabucodonosor. \bibleverse{2} En aquel tiempo el ejército del rey de
Babilonia estaba sitiando Jerusalén. El profeta Jeremías estaba
encerrado en el patio de la guardia, que estaba en la casa del rey de
Judá. \footnote{\textbf{32:2} 2Re 25,1-2}

\bibleverse{3} Porque Sedequías, rey de Judá, le había hecho callar,
diciendo: ``¿Por qué profetizas y dices: ``El Señor dice: ``He aquí que
yo entrego esta ciudad en manos del rey de Babilonia, y él la tomará;
\footnote{\textbf{32:3} Jer 21,7; Jer 27,6} \bibleverse{4} y Sedequías,
rey de Judá, no escapará de la mano de los caldeos, sino que será
entregado a la mano del rey de Babilonia, y hablará con él de boca a
boca, y sus ojos verán sus ojos; \bibleverse{5} y él llevará a Sedequías
a Babilonia, y estará allí hasta que yo lo visite --- dice Yahvé ---,
aunque luches con los caldeos, no prosperarás?''\,'\,'' \footnote{\textbf{32:5}
  Jer 52,11}

\bibleverse{6} Jeremías dijo: ``La palabra de Yahvé vino a mí, diciendo:
\bibleverse{7} `He aquí que Hanamel, hijo de Salum, tu tío, vendrá a ti,
diciendo: ``Compra mi campo que está en Anatot; porque el derecho de
redención es tuyo para comprarlo''\,'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{32:7} Lev
  25,25; Rut 4,3-4}

\bibleverse{8} ``Entonces Hanamel, el hijo de mi tío, vino a mí en el
patio de la guardia, según la palabra de Yavé, y me dijo: `Por favor,
compra mi campo que está en Anatot, que está en la tierra de Benjamín;
porque el derecho de herencia es tuyo, y la redención es tuya. Cómpralo
para ti'. ``Entonces supe que ésta era la palabra de Yahvé.
\bibleverse{9} Compré el campo que estaba en Anatot a Hanamel, hijo de
mi tío, y le pesé el dinero, diecisiete siclos\footnote{\textbf{32:9} Un
  siclo equivale a unos 10 gramos o a unas 0,35 onzas.} de plata.
\bibleverse{10} Firmé la escritura, la sellé, llamé a los testigos y le
pesé el dinero en la balanza. \bibleverse{11} Entonces tomé la escritura
de la compra, tanto la que estaba sellada, que contenía los términos y
condiciones, como la que estaba abierta; \bibleverse{12} y entregué la
escritura de la compra a Baruc hijo de Nerías, hijo de Maseías, en
presencia de Hanamel, hijo de mi tío, y en presencia de los testigos que
firmaron la escritura de la compra, ante todos los judíos que estaban
sentados en el patio de la guardia.

\bibleverse{13} ``Ordené a Baruc delante de ellos, diciendo:
\bibleverse{14} Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Toma
estas escrituras, esta escritura de compra que está sellada, y esta
escritura que está abierta, y ponlas en una vasija de barro, para que
duren muchos días'. \bibleverse{15} Porque el Señor de los Ejércitos, el
Dios de Israel, dice: `Todavía se comprarán casas, campos y viñedos en
esta tierra.'

\hypertarget{oraciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-y-solicitud-de-aclaraciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Oración de Jeremías y solicitud de
aclaración}\label{oraciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-y-solicitud-de-aclaraciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{16} Después de entregar la escritura de compra a Baruc, hijo
de Nerías, oré a Yahvé, diciendo \bibleverse{17} ``¡Ah, Señor Yahvé! He
aquí que tú has hecho los cielos y la tierra con tu gran poder y con tu
brazo extendido. No hay nada demasiado difícil para ti. \footnote{\textbf{32:17}
  Jer 27,5; Luc 1,37} \bibleverse{18} Tú muestras tu bondad a miles de
personas, y devuelves la iniquidad de los padres al seno de sus hijos
después de ellos. El grande, el poderoso Dios, Yahvé de los Ejércitos es
tu nombre: \footnote{\textbf{32:18} Éxod 20,5-6} \bibleverse{19} grande
en el consejo y poderoso en la obra; cuyos ojos están abiertos a todos
los caminos de los hijos de los hombres, para dar a cada uno según sus
caminos y según el fruto de sus obras; \footnote{\textbf{32:19} Rom 2,6}
\bibleverse{20} que hiciste señales y prodigios en la tierra de Egipto,
hasta el día de hoy, tanto en Israel como entre los demás hombres; y te
hiciste un nombre, como lo es hoy; \bibleverse{21} y sacaste a tu pueblo
Israel de la tierra de Egipto con señales, con prodigios, con mano
fuerte, con brazo extendido y con gran terror; \bibleverse{22} y les
diste esta tierra, que juraste a sus padres que les darías, una tierra
que mana leche y miel. \bibleverse{23} Entraron y la poseyeron, pero no
obedecieron tu voz ni anduvieron en tu ley. No han hecho nada de todo lo
que les mandaste hacer. Por eso has hecho que les sobrevenga todo este
mal. \bibleverse{24} ``He aquí que se han construido rampas de asedio
contra la ciudad para tomarla. La ciudad está en manos de los caldeos
que luchan contra ella, a causa de la espada, del hambre y de la peste.
Lo que has dicho ha sucedido. He aquí, tú lo ves. \bibleverse{25} Tú me
has dicho, Señor Yahvé, `Compra el campo por dinero y llama a los
testigos', mientras que la ciudad ha sido entregada en manos de los
caldeos.''

\hypertarget{la-respuesta-de-dios-proclamaciuxf3n-de-iluminaciuxf3n-y-salvaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{La respuesta de Dios (proclamación de iluminación y
salvación)}\label{la-respuesta-de-dios-proclamaciuxf3n-de-iluminaciuxf3n-y-salvaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{26} Entonces vino la palabra de Yahvé a Jeremías, diciendo:
\bibleverse{27} ``He aquí que yo soy Yahvé, el Dios de toda carne. ¿Hay
algo que sea demasiado difícil para mí? \footnote{\textbf{32:27} Núm
  16,22; Jer 32,17} \bibleverse{28} Por eso dice Yahvé: He aquí que yo
entrego esta ciudad en manos de los caldeos y en manos de Nabucodonosor,
rey de Babilonia, y él la tomará. \footnote{\textbf{32:28} Jer 32,3}
\bibleverse{29} Los caldeos, que luchan contra esta ciudad, vendrán y
prenderán fuego a esta ciudad, y la quemarán con las casas en cuyos
tejados han ofrecido incienso a Baal y han derramado libaciones a otros
dioses, para provocarme a la ira. \footnote{\textbf{32:29} Jer 19,13}

\bibleverse{30} ``Porque los hijos de Israel y los hijos de Judá no han
hecho más que lo malo ante mis ojos desde su juventud; porque los hijos
de Israel no han hecho más que provocarme a la ira con la obra de sus
manos, dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{31} Porque esta ciudad ha sido para mí
una provocación de mi ira y de mi enojo desde el día en que la
construyeron hasta el día de hoy, para que la elimine de delante de mí,
\bibleverse{32} a causa de toda la maldad de los hijos de Israel y de
los hijos de Judá, que han hecho para provocarme a la ira: ellos, sus
reyes, sus príncipes, sus sacerdotes, sus profetas, los hombres de Judá
y los habitantes de Jerusalén. \bibleverse{33} Me han dado la espalda y
no el rostro. A pesar de que les enseñé, madrugando y enseñándoles, no
han escuchado para recibir instrucción. \bibleverse{34} Pero pusieron
sus abominaciones en la casa que se llama con mi nombre, para
profanarla. \footnote{\textbf{32:34} Jer 7,30; 2Re 21,4-5}
\bibleverse{35} Edificaron los lugares altos de Baal, que están en el
valle del hijo de Hinom, para hacer pasar por el fuego a sus hijos y a
sus hijas a Moloc, cosa que yo no les mandé. Ni siquiera se me ocurrió
que hicieran esta abominación, para hacer pecar a Judá''. \footnote{\textbf{32:35}
  Jer 7,31; Jer 19,5}

\bibleverse{36} Ahora bien, Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, dice con respecto
a esta ciudad, de la cual ustedes dicen: ``Ha sido entregada en manos
del rey de Babilonia por la espada, por el hambre y por la peste'':
\bibleverse{37} ``He aquí que yo los reuniré de todas las tierras a las
que los he expulsado con mi cólera, con mi ira y con gran indignación, y
los haré volver a este lugar. Haré que habiten con seguridad.
\bibleverse{38} Entonces serán mi pueblo, y yo seré su Dios. \footnote{\textbf{32:38}
  Jer 24,7; Jer 30,22; Jer 31,1; Jer 31,33} \bibleverse{39} Les daré un
solo corazón y un solo camino, para que me teman para siempre, por su
bien y el de sus hijos después de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{32:39} Ezeq
  36,27} \bibleverse{40} Haré un pacto eterno con ellos, que no me
apartaré de seguirlos para hacerles el bien. Pondré mi temor en sus
corazones, para que no se aparten de mí. \bibleverse{41} Sí, me alegraré
por ellos para hacerles el bien, y los plantaré en esta tierra con
seguridad, con todo mi corazón y con toda mi alma.''

\bibleverse{42} Porque Yahvé dice: ``Así como he traído todo este gran
mal sobre este pueblo, así traeré sobre él todo el bien que le he
prometido. \bibleverse{43} Se comprarán campos en esta tierra, de la que
ustedes dicen: `Está desolada, sin hombres ni animales. Está entregada
en manos de los caldeos'. \bibleverse{44} Los hombrescomprarán campos
por dinero, firmarán las escrituras, las sellarán y llamarán a testigos,
en la tierra de Benjamín y en los lugares que rodean a Jerusalén, en las
ciudades de Judá, en las ciudades de la región montañosa, en las
ciudades de la llanura y en las ciudades del sur; porque haré que su
cautiverio sea revertido'', dice el Señor. \footnote{\textbf{32:44} Jer
  29,14; Jer 30,3}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{as-a-prisoner-jeremiah-buys-a-field-in-anathoth-according-to-gods-direction}{%
\subsection{As a prisoner, Jeremiah buys a field in Anathoth according
to God's
direction}\label{as-a-prisoner-jeremiah-buys-a-field-in-anathoth-according-to-gods-direction}}

\hypertarget{section-63}{%
\section{32}\label{section-63}}

\bibleverse{1} This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh in the
tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar. \bibleverse{2} Now at that time the king of Babylon's
army was besieging Jerusalem. Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the
court of the guard, which was in the king of Judah's house.
\bibleverse{3} For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, ``Why
do you prophesy, and say, `Yahweh says, ``Behold, I will give this city
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will take it;
\bibleverse{4} and Zedekiah king of Judah won't escape out of the hand
of the Chaldeans, but will surely be delivered into the hand of the king
of Babylon, and will speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes will
see his eyes; \bibleverse{5} and he will bring Zedekiah to Babylon, and
he will be there until I visit him,'' says Yahweh, ``though you fight
with the Chaldeans, you will not prosper?''\,'\,'' \bibleverse{6}
Jeremiah said, ``Yahweh's word came to me, saying, \bibleverse{7}
`Behold, Hanamel the son of Shallum your uncle will come to you, saying,
``Buy my field that is in Anathoth; for the right of redemption is yours
to buy it.''\,'\,'' \bibleverse{8} ``So Hanamel my uncle's son came to
me in the court of the guard according to Yahweh's word, and said to me,
`Please buy my field that is in Anathoth, which is in the land of
Benjamin; for the right of inheritance is yours, and the redemption is
yours. Buy it for yourself.' ``Then I knew that this was Yahweh's word.
\bibleverse{9} I bought the field that was in Anathoth of Hanamel my
uncle's son, and weighed him the money, even seventeen
shekels\footnote{\textbf{32:9} A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35
  ounces.} of silver. \bibleverse{10} I signed the deed, sealed it,
called witnesses, and weighed the money in the balances to him.
\bibleverse{11} So I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was
sealed, containing the terms and conditions, and that which was open;
\bibleverse{12} and I delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the
son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the presence of Hanamel my
uncle's son, and in the presence of the witnesses who signed the deed of
the purchase, before all the Jews who sat in the court of the guard.
\bibleverse{13} ``I commanded Baruch before them, saying,
\bibleverse{14} Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `Take these
deeds, this deed of the purchase which is sealed, and this deed which is
open, and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may last many days.'
\bibleverse{15} For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: `Houses
and fields and vineyards will yet again be bought in this land.'

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-prayer-and-request-for-clarification}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's prayer and request for
clarification}\label{jeremiahs-prayer-and-request-for-clarification}}

\bibleverse{16} Now after I had delivered the deed of the purchase to
Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed to Yahweh, saying, \bibleverse{17}
``Ah Lord Yahweh! Behold, you have made the heavens and the earth by
your great power and by your outstretched arm. There is nothing too hard
for you. \bibleverse{18} You show loving kindness to thousands, and
repay the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after
them. The great, the mighty God, Yahweh of Armies is your name:
\bibleverse{19} great in counsel, and mighty in work; whose eyes are
open to all the ways of the children of men, to give everyone according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings; \bibleverse{20}
who performed signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even to this day,
both in Israel and among other men; and made yourself a name, as it is
today; \bibleverse{21} and brought your people Israel out of the land of
Egypt with signs, with wonders, with a strong hand, with an outstretched
arm, and with great terror; \bibleverse{22} and gave them this land,
which you swore to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk
and honey. \bibleverse{23} They came in and possessed it, but they
didn't obey your voice and didn't walk in your law. They have done
nothing of all that you commanded them to do. Therefore you have caused
all this evil to come upon them. i1 \bibleverse{24} ``Behold, siege
ramps have been built against the city to take it. The city is given
into the hand of the Chaldeans who fight against it, because of the
sword, of the famine, and of the pestilence. What you have spoken has
happened. Behold, you see it. \bibleverse{25} You have said to me, Lord
Yahweh, `Buy the field for money, and call witnesses;' whereas the city
is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.''

\hypertarget{gods-answer-proclamation-of-enlightenment-and-salvation}{%
\subsection{God's answer (proclamation of enlightenment and
salvation)}\label{gods-answer-proclamation-of-enlightenment-and-salvation}}

\bibleverse{26} Then Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, saying,
\bibleverse{27} ``Behold, I am Yahweh, the God of all flesh. Is there
anything too hard for me? \bibleverse{28} Therefore Yahweh says: Behold,
I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand
of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and he will take it. \bibleverse{29}
The Chaldeans, who fight against this city, will come and set this city
on fire, and burn it with the houses on whose roofs they have offered
incense to Baal, and poured out drink offerings to other gods, to
provoke me to anger. \bibleverse{30} ``For the children of Israel and
the children of Judah have done only that which was evil in my sight
from their youth; for the children of Israel have only provoked me to
anger with the work of their hands, says Yahweh. \bibleverse{31} For
this city has been to me a provocation of my anger and of my wrath from
the day that they built it even to this day, so that I should remove it
from before my face, \bibleverse{32} because of all the evil of the
children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to
provoke me to anger---they, their kings, their princes, their priests,
their prophets, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{33} They have turned their backs to me, and not their faces.
Although I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have
not listened to receive instruction. \bibleverse{34} But they set their
abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.
\bibleverse{35} They built the high places of Baal, which are in the
valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to
pass through fire to Molech, which I didn't command them. It didn't even
come into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah
to sin.'' \bibleverse{36} Now therefore Yahweh, the God of Israel, says
concerning this city, about which you say, ``It is given into the hand
of the king of Babylon by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence:'' \bibleverse{37} ``Behold, I will gather them out of all
the countries where I have driven them in my anger, and in my wrath, and
in great indignation; and I will bring them again to this place. I will
cause them to dwell safely. \bibleverse{38} Then they will be my people,
and I will be their God. \bibleverse{39} I will give them one heart and
one way, that they may fear me forever, for their good and the good of
their children after them. \bibleverse{40} I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from following them, to do
them good. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart
from me. \bibleverse{41} Yes, I will rejoice over them to do them good,
and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and
with my whole soul.'' \bibleverse{42} For Yahweh says: ``Just as I have
brought all this great evil on this people, so I will bring on them all
the good that I have promised them. \bibleverse{43} Fields will be
bought in this land, about which you say, `It is desolate, without man
or animal. It is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.' \bibleverse{44}
Men will buy fields for money, sign the deeds, seal them, and call
witnesses, in the land of Benjamin, and in the places around Jerusalem,
in the cities of Judah, in the cities of the hill country, in the cities
of the lowland, and in the cities of the South; for I will cause their
captivity to be reversed,'' says Yahweh.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{profecuxedas-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-jerusaluxe9n-y-juduxe1}{%
\subsection{Profecías de salvación para Jerusalén y
Judá}\label{profecuxedas-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-jerusaluxe9n-y-juduxe1}}

\hypertarget{section-64}{%
\section{33}\label{section-64}}

\bibleverse{1} Además, la palabra de Yahvé vino a Jeremías por segunda
vez, mientras aún estaba encerrado en el patio de la guardia, diciendo:
\footnote{\textbf{33:1} Jer 32,2} \bibleverse{2} ``Yahvé que lo hace,
Yahvé que lo forma para establecerlo --- Yahvé es su nombre ---, dice:
\bibleverse{3} `Clama a mí, y yo te responderé, y te mostraré cosas
grandes y difíciles, que tú no conoces'. \bibleverse{4} Porque Yahvé, el
Dios de Israel, dice acerca de las casas de esta ciudad y de las casas
de los reyes de Judá, que están derribadas para hacer una defensa contra
los montículos y contra la espada \footnote{\textbf{33:4} Is 22,10}
\bibleverse{5} `Mientras los hombres vienen a luchar con los caldeos y a
llenarlas de cadáveres de hombres, a quienes he matado en mi cólera y en
mi ira, y por toda su maldad he ocultado mi rostro de esta ciudad,
\bibleverse{6} he aquí que yo le traeré salud y curación, y los curaré;
y les revelaré abundancia de paz y de verdad. \bibleverse{7}
Restableceré la fortuna de Judá e Israel, y los edificaré como al
principio. \footnote{\textbf{33:7} Jer 29,14; Jer 30,3} \bibleverse{8}
Los limpiaré de toda su iniquidad con la que han pecado contra mí.
Perdonaré todas sus iniquidades con las que han pecado contra mí y con
las que se han rebelado contra mí. \footnote{\textbf{33:8} Jer 31,34}
\bibleverse{9} Esta ciudad será para mí un nombre de alegría, de
alabanza y de gloria ante todas las naciones de la tierra, que oirán
todo el bien que les hago, y temerán y temblarán por todo el bien y por
toda la paz que les proporciono''.

\bibleverse{10} Dice el Señor: ``Pero otra vez se oirá en este lugar,
del que decís: `Está desolado, sin hombres y sin animales, en las
ciudades de Judá y en las calles de Jerusalén, que están desoladas, sin
hombres y sin habitantes y sin animales', \bibleverse{11} la voz de la
alegría y la voz del gozo, la voz del novio y la voz de la novia, la voz
de los que dicen: `Dad gracias a Yahvé de los Ejércitos, porque Yahvé es
bueno, porque su bondad es eterna; que traen la acción de gracias a la
casa de Yahvé. Porque haré que el cautiverio de la tierra se revierta
como al principio'', dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{33:11} Jer 7,34; Sal
  106,1; Esd 3,11}

\bibleverse{12} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice: ``Volverá a haber en
este lugar, que es un desierto, sin hombres y sin animales, y en todas
sus ciudades, una morada de pastores que hagan descansar sus rebaños.
\bibleverse{13} En las ciudades de la región montañosa, en las ciudades
de la llanura, en las ciudades del sur, en la tierra de Benjamín, en los
lugares que rodean a Jerusalén y en las ciudades de Judá, los rebaños
volverán a pasar bajo las manos del que los cuenta'', dice el Señor.
\footnote{\textbf{33:13} Jer 32,44}

\hypertarget{profecuxeda-del-brote-de-david-del-futuro-y-de-la-existencia-eterna-del-pueblo-la-realeza-davuxeddica-y-el-sacerdocio-levuxedtico}{%
\subsection{Profecía del brote de David del futuro y de la existencia
eterna del pueblo, la realeza davídica y el sacerdocio
levítico}\label{profecuxeda-del-brote-de-david-del-futuro-y-de-la-existencia-eterna-del-pueblo-la-realeza-davuxeddica-y-el-sacerdocio-levuxedtico}}

\bibleverse{14} ``He aquí que vienen días --- dice Yahvé --- en que
cumpliré la buena palabra que he dicho sobre la casa de Israel y sobre
la casa de Judá. \bibleverse{15} ``En aquellos días y en aquella época,
Haré que crezca una rama de justicia hasta David. Hará justicia y
rectitud en la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{33:15} Jer 23,5; Is 4,2}
\bibleverse{16} En esos días Judá se salvará, y Jerusalén habitará con
seguridad. Este es el nombre por el que será llamada: Yahvé nuestra
justicia''. \footnote{\textbf{33:16} Jer 23,6; Deut 33,28}

\bibleverse{17} Porque Yahvé dice: ``Nunca le faltará a David un hombre
que se siente en el trono de la casa de Israel. \footnote{\textbf{33:17}
  2Sam 7,12; 1Re 9,5} \bibleverse{18} A los sacerdotes levitas no les
faltará un hombre delante de mí para ofrecer holocaustos, quemar
ofrendas y hacer sacrificios continuamente.''

\bibleverse{19} La palabra de Yavé vino a Jeremías, diciendo:
\bibleverse{20} ``Dice Yavé: `Si puedes romper mi pacto del día y mi
pacto de la noche, de modo que no haya día ni noche en su tiempo,
\footnote{\textbf{33:20} Jer 31,35-36} \bibleverse{21} entonces también
podría romperse mi pacto con David mi siervo, para que no tenga un hijo
que reine en su trono; y con los sacerdotes levitas, mis ministros.
\bibleverse{22} Como el ejército del cielo no se puede contar y la arena
del mar no se puede medir, así multiplicaré la descendencia de mi siervo
David y de los levitas que me sirven''. \footnote{\textbf{33:22} Gén
  15,5; Gén 22,17}

\bibleverse{23} La palabra de Yahvé vino a Jeremías, diciendo:
\bibleverse{24} ``No consideres lo que ha dicho este pueblo, diciendo:
``¿Acaso Yahvé ha desechado a las dos familias que eligió?''. Así
desprecian a mi pueblo, para que no sea más una nación ante ellos''.
\bibleverse{25} Dice Yahvé: ``Si mi pacto del día y de la noche falla,
si no he establecido las ordenanzas del cielo y de la tierra,
\footnote{\textbf{33:25} Jer 33,20} \bibleverse{26} entonces también
desecharé a la descendencia de Jacob y de David, mi siervo, para no
tomar de su descendencia a los gobernantes de la descendencia de
Abraham, de Isaac y de Jacob; porque haré que su cautiverio sea
revertido y tendré misericordia de ellos.'' \footnote{\textbf{33:26} Jer
  32,44}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{prophecies-of-salvation-for-jerusalem-and-judah}{%
\subsection{Prophecies of salvation for Jerusalem and
Judah}\label{prophecies-of-salvation-for-jerusalem-and-judah}}

\hypertarget{section-65}{%
\section{33}\label{section-65}}

\bibleverse{1} Moreover Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah the second time,
while he was still locked up in the court of the guard, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Yahweh who does it, Yahweh who forms it to establish
it---Yahweh is his name, says: \bibleverse{3} `Call to me, and I will
answer you, and will show you great and difficult things, which you
don't know.' \bibleverse{4} For Yahweh, the God of Israel, says
concerning the houses of this city and concerning the houses of the
kings of Judah, which are broken down to make a defense against the
mounds and against the sword: \bibleverse{5} `While men come to fight
with the Chaldeans, and to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I
have killed in my anger and in my wrath, and for all whose wickedness I
have hidden my face from this city, \bibleverse{6} behold, I will bring
it health and healing, and I will cure them; and I will reveal to them
abundance of peace and truth. \bibleverse{7} I will restore the fortunes
of Judah and Israel, and will build them as at the first. \bibleverse{8}
I will cleanse them from all their iniquity by which they have sinned
against me. I will pardon all their iniquities by which they have sinned
against me and by which they have transgressed against me.
\bibleverse{9} This city will be to me for a name of joy, for praise,
and for glory, before all the nations of the earth, which will hear all
the good that I do to them, and will fear and tremble for all the good
and for all the peace that I provide to it.'\,'' \bibleverse{10} Yahweh
says: ``Yet again there will be heard in this place, about which you
say, `It is waste, without man and without animal, even in the cities of
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man
and without inhabitant and without animal,' \bibleverse{11} the voice of
joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice
of the bride, the voice of those who say, `Give thanks to Yahweh of
Armies, for Yahweh is good, for his loving kindness endures forever;'
who bring thanksgiving into Yahweh's house. For I will cause the
captivity of the land to be reversed as at the first,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{12} Yahweh of Armies says: ``Yet again there will be in this
place, which is waste, without man and without animal, and in all its
cities, a habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.
\bibleverse{13} In the cities of the hill country, in the cities of the
lowland, in the cities of the South, in the land of Benjamin, in the
places around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, the flocks will
again pass under the hands of him who counts them,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{prophecy-of-davids-sprouting-of-the-future-and-of-the-eternal-existence-of-the-people-the-davidic-kingship-and-the-levitical-priesthood}{%
\subsection{Prophecy of David's sprouting of the future and of the
eternal existence of the people, the Davidic kingship and the Levitical
priesthood}\label{prophecy-of-davids-sprouting-of-the-future-and-of-the-eternal-existence-of-the-people-the-davidic-kingship-and-the-levitical-priesthood}}

\bibleverse{14} ``Behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will
perform that good word which I have spoken concerning the house of
Israel and concerning the house of Judah. \bibleverse{15} ``In those
days and at that time, I will cause a Branch of righteousness to grow up
to David. He will execute justice and righteousness in the land.
\bibleverse{16} In those days Judah will be saved, and Jerusalem will
dwell safely. This is the name by which she will be called: Yahweh our
righteousness.'' \bibleverse{17} For Yahweh says: ``David will never
lack a man to sit on the throne of the house of Israel. \bibleverse{18}
The Levitical priests won't lack a man before me to offer burnt
offerings, to burn meal offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.''
\bibleverse{19} Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, saying, \bibleverse{20}
``Yahweh says: `If you can break my covenant of the day and my covenant
of the night, so that there will not be day and night in their time,
\bibleverse{21} then my covenant could also be broken with David my
servant, that he won't have a son to reign on his throne; and with the
Levitical priests, my ministers. \bibleverse{22} As the army of the sky
can't be counted, and the sand of the sea can't be measured, so I will
multiply the offspring of David my servant and the Levites who minister
to me.'\,'' \bibleverse{23} Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, saying,
\bibleverse{24} ``Don't consider what this people has spoken, saying,
`Has Yahweh cast off the two families which he chose?' Thus they despise
my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.''
\bibleverse{25} Yahweh says: ``If my covenant of day and night fails, if
I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth, \bibleverse{26}
then I will also cast away the offspring of Jacob, and of David my
servant, so that I will not take of his offspring to be rulers over the
offspring of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for I will cause their captivity
to be reversed and will have mercy on them.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{anunciando-el-destino-de-sedechuxeeas}{%
\subsection{Anunciando el destino de
Sedechîas}\label{anunciando-el-destino-de-sedechuxeeas}}

\hypertarget{section-66}{%
\section{34}\label{section-66}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé, cuando
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, con todo su ejército, todos los reinos
de la tierra que estaban bajo su dominio y todos los pueblos, combatían
contra Jerusalén y contra todas sus ciudades, diciendo \bibleverse{2}
``Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Ve y habla a Sedequías, rey de Judá,
y dile que Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que yo entregaré esta ciudad en manos
del rey de Babilonia y la quemará con fuego. \bibleverse{3} No escaparás
de su mano, sino que seguramente serás tomado y entregado en su mano.
Tus ojos verán los ojos del rey de Babilonia, y él hablará contigo boca
a boca. Irás a Babilonia''. \footnote{\textbf{34:3} Jer 32,4}

\bibleverse{4} ``Pero escucha la palabra de Yahvé, oh Sedequías, rey de
Judá. Yahvé dice respecto a ti: `No morirás a espada. \footnote{\textbf{34:4}
  Jer 52,11} \bibleverse{5} Morirás en paz; y con los ardores de tus
padres, los antiguos reyes que fueron antes de ti, así te harán arder.
Se lamentarán de ti, diciendo: ``¡Ah, Señor!'', porque yo he dicho la
palabra', dice Yahvé''. \footnote{\textbf{34:5} 2Cró 16,14; Jer 22,18}

\bibleverse{6} El profeta Jeremías dijo todas estas palabras a
Sedequías, rey de Judá, en Jerusalén, \bibleverse{7} cuando el ejército
del rey de Babilonia combatía contra Jerusalén y contra todas las
ciudades de Judá que quedaban, contra Laquis y contra Azeca; pues sólo
éstas quedaban de las ciudades de Judá como ciudades fortificadas.
\footnote{\textbf{34:7} 2Re 25,1}

\hypertarget{el-discurso-de-jeremuxedas-y-la-amenaza-de-castigo-de-dios-por-la-violaciuxf3n-de-la-fidelidad-cometida-con-los-esclavos-hebreos-liberados-en-jerusaluxe9n}{%
\subsection{El discurso de Jeremías y la amenaza de castigo de Dios por
la violación de la fidelidad cometida con los esclavos hebreos liberados
en
Jerusalén}\label{el-discurso-de-jeremuxedas-y-la-amenaza-de-castigo-de-dios-por-la-violaciuxf3n-de-la-fidelidad-cometida-con-los-esclavos-hebreos-liberados-en-jerusaluxe9n}}

\bibleverse{8} Llegó a Jeremías la palabra de Yahvé, después de que el
rey Sedequías había hecho un pacto con todo el pueblo que estaba en
Jerusalén, para proclamarles la libertad, \footnote{\textbf{34:8} Jer
  34,14} \bibleverse{9} que cada uno dejara libre a su siervo y cada uno
a su sierva, que fuera hebreo o hebrea, para que nadie hiciera de ellos
siervos, de un judío a su hermano. \bibleverse{10} Obedecieron todos los
príncipes y todo el pueblo que habían pactado que cada uno dejara libre
a su siervo y cada uno a su sierva, para que nadie los convirtiera en
siervos. Ellos obedecieron y los dejaron ir, \bibleverse{11} pero
después se volvieron, e hicieron volver a los siervos y a las siervas
que habían dejado libres, y los sometieron como siervos y como siervas.

\hypertarget{la-palabra-de-juicio-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La palabra de juicio de
Dios}\label{la-palabra-de-juicio-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{12} Por eso vino a Jeremías una palabra de Yahvé, que decía:
\bibleverse{13} ``Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Hice un pacto con
vuestros padres el día que los saqué de la tierra de Egipto, de la casa
de servidumbre, diciendo: \bibleverse{14} Al cabo de siete años, cada
uno de vosotros liberará a su hermano hebreo, que ha sido vendido a
vosotros y os ha servido durante seis años. Lo dejaréis libre de
vosotros. Pero vuestros padres no me escucharon y no inclinaron su oído.
\footnote{\textbf{34:14} Éxod 21,2; Deut 15,12} \bibleverse{15} Ahora os
habíais convertido y habíais hecho lo que es justo a mis ojos, al
proclamar cada uno la libertad de su prójimo. Habías hecho un pacto ante
mí en la casa que se llama con mi nombre; \bibleverse{16} pero te
volviste y profanaste mi nombre, y cada uno hizo volver a su siervo y a
su sierva, a quienes habías dejado libres a su antojo. Los sometisteis
para que os sirvieran de siervos y de siervas'\,''.

\bibleverse{17} Por eso dice el Señor: ``No me habéis escuchado para
proclamar la libertad, cada uno a su hermano y cada uno a su prójimo. He
aquí que yo os anuncio la libertad --- dice el Señor --- a la espada, a
la peste y al hambre. Haré que te arrojen de un lado a otro entre todos
los reinos de la tierra. \bibleverse{18} Entregaré a los hombres que han
transgredido mi pacto, que no han cumplido las palabras del pacto que
hicieron ante mí cuando cortaron el becerro en dos y pasaron entre sus
partes: \footnote{\textbf{34:18} Gén 15,10; Gén 15,17} \bibleverse{19} a
los príncipes de Judá, a los príncipes de Jerusalén, a los eunucos, a
los sacerdotes y a todo el pueblo de la tierra, que pasaron entre las
partes del becerro. \bibleverse{20} Incluso los entregaré en manos de
sus enemigos y en manos de los que buscan su vida. Sus cadáveres serán
alimento para las aves del cielo y para los animales de la tierra.
\footnote{\textbf{34:20} Jer 7,33}

\bibleverse{21} ``Entregaré a Sedequías, rey de Judá, y a sus príncipes
en manos de sus enemigos, en manos de los que buscan su vida y en manos
del ejército del rey de Babilonia, que se ha alejado de ti.
\bibleverse{22} He aquí que yo ordeno --- dice el Señor --- y hago que
vuelvan a esta ciudad. Lucharán contra ella, la tomarán y la quemarán
con fuego. Convertiré las ciudades de Judá en una desolación, sin
habitantes''. \footnote{\textbf{34:22} Jer 37,8}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{announcing-zedekiahs-fate}{%
\subsection{Announcing Zedekiah's
fate}\label{announcing-zedekiahs-fate}}

\hypertarget{section-67}{%
\section{34}\label{section-67}}

\bibleverse{1} The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, when
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, with all his army, all the kingdoms of
the earth that were under his dominion, and all the peoples, were
fighting against Jerusalem and against all its cities, saying:
\bibleverse{2} ``Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, `Go, and speak to
Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Yahweh says, ``Behold, I will give
this city into the hand of the king of Babylon and he will burn it with
fire. \bibleverse{3} You won't escape out of his hand, but will surely
be taken and delivered into his hand. Your eyes will see the eyes of the
king of Babylon, and he will speak with you mouth to mouth. You will go
to Babylon.''\,' \bibleverse{4} ``Yet hear Yahweh's word, O Zedekiah
king of Judah. Yahweh says concerning you, `You won't die by the sword.
\bibleverse{5} You will die in peace; and with the burnings of your
fathers, the former kings who were before you, so they will make a
burning for you. They will lament you, saying, ``Ah Lord!'' for I have
spoken the word,' says Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{6} Then Jeremiah the
prophet spoke all these words to Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,
\bibleverse{7} when the king of Babylon's army was fighting against
Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against
Lachish and against Azekah; for these alone remained of the cities of
Judah as fortified cities.

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-speech-and-gods-threat-of-punishment-for-the-violation-of-fidelity-committed-with-the-freed-hebrew-slaves-in-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's speech and God's threat of punishment for the
violation of fidelity committed with the freed Hebrew slaves in
Jerusalem}\label{jeremiahs-speech-and-gods-threat-of-punishment-for-the-violation-of-fidelity-committed-with-the-freed-hebrew-slaves-in-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{8} The word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, after King
Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people who were at Jerusalem,
to proclaim liberty to them, \bibleverse{9} that every man should let
his male servant, and every man his female servant, who is a Hebrew or a
Hebrewess, go free, that no one should make bondservants of them, of a
Jew his brother. \bibleverse{10} All the princes and all the people
obeyed who had entered into the covenant, that everyone should let his
male servant and everyone his female servant go free, that no one should
make bondservants of them any more. They obeyed and let them go,
\bibleverse{11} but afterwards they turned, and caused the servants and
the handmaids whom they had let go free to return, and brought them into
subjection for servants and for handmaids.

\hypertarget{gods-word-of-judgment}{%
\subsection{God's Word of Judgment}\label{gods-word-of-judgment}}

\bibleverse{12} Therefore Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh,
saying, \bibleverse{13} ``Yahweh, the God of Israel, says: `I made a
covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying: \bibleverse{14} At
the end of seven years, every man of you shall release his brother who
is a Hebrew, who has been sold to you, and has served you six years. You
shall let him go free from you. But your fathers didn't listen to me,
and didn't incline their ear. \bibleverse{15} You had now turned, and
had done that which is right in my eyes, in every man proclaiming
liberty to his neighbor. You had made a covenant before me in the house
which is called by my name; \bibleverse{16} but you turned and profaned
my name, and every man caused his servant and every man his handmaid,
whom you had let go free at their pleasure, to return. You brought them
into subjection, to be to you for servants and for handmaids.'\,''
\bibleverse{17} Therefore Yahweh says: ``You have not listened to me, to
proclaim liberty, every man to his brother, and every man to his
neighbor. Behold, I proclaim to you a liberty,'' says Yahweh, ``to the
sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine. I will make you be tossed
back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth. \bibleverse{18} I
will give the men who have transgressed my covenant, who have not
performed the words of the covenant which they made before me when they
cut the calf in two and passed between its parts: \bibleverse{19} the
princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests,
and all the people of the land, who passed between the parts of the
calf. \bibleverse{20} I will even give them into the hand of their
enemies and into the hand of those who seek their life. Their dead
bodies will be food for the birds of the sky and for the animals of the
earth. \bibleverse{21} ``I will give Zedekiah king of Judah and his
princes into the hands of their enemies, into the hands of those who
seek their life and into the hands of the king of Babylon's army, who
has gone away from you. \bibleverse{22} Behold, I will command,'' says
Yahweh, ``and cause them to return to this city. They will fight against
it, take it, and burn it with fire. I will make the cities of Judah a
desolation, without inhabitant.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{por-mandato-divino-jeremuxedas-prueba-la-fidelidad-de-los-recabitas}{%
\subsection{Por mandato divino, Jeremías prueba la fidelidad de los
recabitas}\label{por-mandato-divino-jeremuxedas-prueba-la-fidelidad-de-los-recabitas}}

\hypertarget{section-68}{%
\section{35}\label{section-68}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé en los días
de Joacim hijo de Josías, rey de Judá, diciendo: \bibleverse{2} ``Ve a
la casa de los recabitas y habla con ellos, y hazlos entrar en la casa
de Yavé, en una de las habitaciones, y dales de beber vino.''
\footnote{\textbf{35:2} 1Cró 2,55}

\bibleverse{3} Entonces tomé a Jaazanías hijo de Jeremías, hijo de
Habazzinías, con sus hermanos, con todos sus hijos y con toda la casa de
los recabitas; \bibleverse{4} y los llevé a la casa de Yavé, a la
habitación de los hijos de Hanán hijo de Igdaliah, el hombre de Dios,
que estaba junto a la habitación de los príncipes, que estaba encima de
la habitación de Maasías hijo de Salum, el guardián del umbral.
\bibleverse{5} Puse delante de los hijos de la casa de los recabitas
tazones llenos de vino y copas, y les dije: ``¡Beban vino!''

\bibleverse{6} Pero ellos dijeron: ``No beberemos vino, porque Jonadab,
hijo de Recab, nuestro padre, nos lo ordenó diciendo: ``No beberéis
vino, ni vosotros ni vuestros hijos, para siempre. \footnote{\textbf{35:6}
  2Re 10,15; 2Re 10,23} \bibleverse{7} No construiréis casa, ni
sembraréis semilla, ni plantaréis viña, ni tendréis nada; sino que todos
vuestros días habitaréis en tiendas, para que viváis muchos días en la
tierra en que vivís como nómadas.' \bibleverse{8} Hemos obedecido la voz
de Jonadab, hijo de Recab, nuestro padre, en todo lo que nos ordenó: no
beber vino en todos nuestros días, ni nosotros, ni nuestras mujeres, ni
nuestros hijos, ni nuestras hijas; \bibleverse{9} y no construir casas
para habitarlas. No tenemos viña, ni campo, ni semilla; \bibleverse{10}
sino que hemos vivido en tiendas, y hemos obedecido y hecho conforme a
todo lo que nos mandó nuestro padre Jonadab. \bibleverse{11} Pero cuando
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, subió al país, dijimos: ``¡Ven! Vayamos
a Jerusalén por miedo al ejército de los caldeos, y por miedo al
ejército de los sirios; así moraremos en Jerusalén'\,''.

\hypertarget{el-discurso-de-jeremuxedas-a-los-transeuxfantes}{%
\subsection{El discurso de Jeremías a los
transeúntes}\label{el-discurso-de-jeremuxedas-a-los-transeuxfantes}}

\bibleverse{12} Entonces vino la palabra de Yahvé a Jeremías, diciendo:
\bibleverse{13} ``Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Ve y
di a los hombres de Judá y a los habitantes de Jerusalén: ``¿No
recibiréis instrucción para escuchar mis palabras?'', dice Yahvé.
\bibleverse{14} ``Las palabras de Jonadab, hijo de Recab, que ordenó a
sus hijos que no bebieran vino, se han cumplido; y hasta el día de hoy
no beben, pues obedecen el mandato de su padre; pero yo os he hablado,
madrugando y hablando, y no me habéis escuchado. \bibleverse{15} También
os he enviado a todos mis siervos los profetas, madrugando y
enviándolos, diciendo: `Cada uno de vosotros debe volver ahora de su mal
camino, enmendar sus acciones y no ir tras otros dioses para servirles.
Entonces habitaréis en la tierra que os he dado a vosotros y a vuestros
padres;' pero no habéis inclinado vuestro oído ni me habéis escuchado.
\footnote{\textbf{35:15} Jer 25,4-7} \bibleverse{16} Los hijos de
Jonadab, hijo de Recab, han cumplido el mandamiento de su padre que él
les ordenó, pero este pueblo no me ha escuchado.''\,'

\bibleverse{17} ``Por tanto, Yahvé, el Dios de los Ejércitos, el Dios de
Israel, dice: `He aquí que yo traigo sobre Judá y sobre todos los
habitantes de Jerusalén todo el mal que he pronunciado contra ellos,
porque les he hablado, pero no han escuchado; y los he llamado, pero no
han respondido.'\,'' \footnote{\textbf{35:17} Jer 7,13}

\bibleverse{18} Jeremías dijo a la casa de los recabitas: ``Yahvé de los
Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Porque habéis obedecido el mandato
de Jonadab, vuestro padre, y habéis guardado todos sus preceptos, y
habéis hecho conforme a todo lo que os ha mandado', \bibleverse{19} por
lo tanto Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: `A Jonadab,
hijo de Recab, no le faltará un hombre que esté delante de mí para
siempre'\,''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{by-divine-command-jeremiah-tests-the-fidelity-of-the-rechabites}{%
\subsection{By divine command, Jeremiah tests the fidelity of the
Rechabites}\label{by-divine-command-jeremiah-tests-the-fidelity-of-the-rechabites}}

\hypertarget{section-69}{%
\section{35}\label{section-69}}

\bibleverse{1} The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh in the days
of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying, \bibleverse{2}
``Go to the house of the Rechabites, and speak to them, and bring them
into Yahweh's house, into one of the rooms, and give them wine to
drink.'' \bibleverse{3} Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the
son of Habazziniah, with his brothers, all his sons, and the whole house
of the Rechabites; \bibleverse{4} and I brought them into Yahweh's
house, into the room of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man
of God, which was by the room of the princes, which was above the room
of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the threshold.
\bibleverse{5} I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites
bowls full of wine, and cups; and I said to them, ``Drink wine!''
\bibleverse{6} But they said, ``We will drink no wine; for Jonadab the
son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, `You shall drink no
wine, neither you nor your children, forever. \bibleverse{7} You shall
not build a house, sow seed, plant a vineyard, or have any; but all your
days you shall dwell in tents, that you may live many days in the land
in which you live as nomads.' \bibleverse{8} We have obeyed the voice of
Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, in all that he commanded us, to
drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, or our daughters;
\bibleverse{9} and not to build houses for ourselves to dwell in. We
have no vineyard, field, or seed; \bibleverse{10} but we have lived in
tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our
father commanded us. \bibleverse{11} But when Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon came up into the land, we said, `Come! Let's go to Jerusalem for
fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the
Syrians; so we will dwell at Jerusalem.'\,''

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-speech-to-passers-by}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's speech to
passers-by}\label{jeremiahs-speech-to-passers-by}}

\bibleverse{12} Then Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, saying,
\bibleverse{13} ``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `Go and
tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ``Will you not
receive instruction to listen to my words?'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{14} ``The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab that he
commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed; and to this day
they drink none, for they obey their father's commandment; but I have
spoken to you, rising up early and speaking, and you have not listened
to me. \bibleverse{15} I have sent also to you all my servants the
prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, `Every one of you
must return now from his evil way, amend your doings, and don't go after
other gods to serve them. Then you will dwell in the land which I have
given to you and to your fathers;' but you have not inclined your ear,
nor listened to me. \bibleverse{16} The sons of Jonadab the son of
Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded
them, but this people has not listened to me.''\,' \bibleverse{17}
``Therefore Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `Behold,
I will bring on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the
evil that I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken to them,
but they have not heard; and I have called to them, but they have not
answered.'\,'' \bibleverse{18} Jeremiah said to the house of the
Rechabites, ``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `Because you
have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his
precepts, and done according to all that he commanded you,'
\bibleverse{19} therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says:
`Jonadab the son of Rechab will not lack a man to stand before me
forever.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{hacer-el-libro-y-leerlo-a-la-gente-y-a-los-superiores}{%
\subsection{Hacer el libro y leerlo a la gente y a los
superiores}\label{hacer-el-libro-y-leerlo-a-la-gente-y-a-los-superiores}}

\hypertarget{section-70}{%
\section{36}\label{section-70}}

\bibleverse{1} En el cuarto año de Joacim hijo de Josías, rey de Judá,
llegó a Jeremías esta palabra de parte de Yavé, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{36:1}
  Jer 25,1} \bibleverse{2} ``Toma un rollo de libro y escribe en él
todas las palabras que te he dicho contra Israel, contra Judá y contra
todas las naciones, desde el día en que te hablé, desde los días de
Josías hasta hoy. \bibleverse{3} Puede ser que la casa de Judá oiga todo
el mal que pienso hacerles, para que cada uno se convierta de su mal
camino; para que yo perdone su iniquidad y su pecado.'' \footnote{\textbf{36:3}
  Jer 26,3}

\bibleverse{4} Entonces Jeremías llamó a Baruc hijo de Nerías, y Baruc
escribió de boca de Jeremías todas las palabras de Yavé, que le había
hablado, en un rollo de libro. \footnote{\textbf{36:4} Jer 32,12}
\bibleverse{5} Jeremías ordenó a Baruc, diciendo: ``Estoy restringido.
No puedo entrar en la casa de Yavé. \bibleverse{6} Por lo tanto, ve y
lee del rollo que has escrito de mi boca, las palabras de Yavé, a los
oídos del pueblo en la casa de Yavé en el día de ayuno. También las
leerás en los oídos de todo Judá que salga de sus ciudades.
\bibleverse{7} Puede ser que presenten su súplica ante Yavé, y que cada
uno se convierta de su mal camino; porque Yavé ha pronunciado gran enojo
e ira contra este pueblo.'' \footnote{\textbf{36:7} Jer 36,3}

\bibleverse{8} Baruc, hijo de Nerías, hizo todo lo que le mandó el
profeta Jeremías, leyendo en el libro las palabras de Yahvé en la casa
de Yahvé. \bibleverse{9} En el quinto año de Joacim hijo de Josías, rey
de Judá, en el mes noveno, todo el pueblo de Jerusalén y todo el pueblo
que venía de las ciudades de Judá a Jerusalén, proclamaron un ayuno ante
Yavé. \bibleverse{10} Entonces Baruc leyó las palabras de Jeremías del
libro en la casa de Yavé, en la sala de Gemarías, hijo del escriba
Safán, en el atrio superior, a la entrada de la puerta nueva de la casa
de Yavé, a oídos de todo el pueblo.

\bibleverse{11} Cuando Micaías, hijo de Gemarías, hijo de Safán, escuchó
del libro todas las palabras de Yahvé, \bibleverse{12} bajó a la casa
del rey, a la sala del escriba; y he aquí que todos los príncipes
estaban sentados allí, el escriba Elisama, Delaías hijo de Semaías,
Elnatán hijo de Acbor, Gemarías hijo de Safán, Sedequías hijo de
Ananías, y todos los príncipes. \bibleverse{13} Entonces Micaías les
declaró todas las palabras que había oído, cuando Baruc leyó el libro a
oídos del pueblo. \bibleverse{14} Entonces todos los príncipes enviaron
a Jehudí hijo de Netanías, hijo de Selemías, hijo de Cusi, a Baruc,
diciendo: ``Toma en tu mano el rollo que has leído a oídos del pueblo, y
ven.'' Entonces Baruc, hijo de Nerías, tomó el rollo en su mano y se
acercó a ellos. \bibleverse{15} Ellos le dijeron: ``Siéntate ahora y
léelo ante nosotros''. Así que Baruc lo leyó en su audiencia.

\bibleverse{16} Cuando escucharon todas las palabras, se volvieron
temerosos unos de otros y dijeron a Baruc: ``Sin duda, contaremos al rey
todas estas palabras.'' \bibleverse{17} Le preguntaron a Baruc,
diciendo: ``Dinos ahora, ¿cómo has escrito todas estas palabras en su
boca?''

\bibleverse{18} Entonces Baruc les respondió: ``Él me dictó todas estas
palabras con su boca, y yo las escribí con tinta en el libro''.

\bibleverse{19} Entonces los príncipes le dijeron a Baruc: ``Tú y
Jeremías vayan a esconderse. Que nadie sepa dónde están''.

\hypertarget{el-rey-joacim-corta-y-quema-el-libro-de-adivinaciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas}{%
\subsection{El rey Joacim corta y quema el libro de adivinación de
Jeremías}\label{el-rey-joacim-corta-y-quema-el-libro-de-adivinaciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas}}

\bibleverse{20} Entraron al rey en el atrio, pero habían guardado el
rollo en la habitación del escriba Elisama. Entonces contaron todas las
palabras a la vista del rey. \bibleverse{21} El rey envió a Jehudí a
buscar el rollo y lo sacó de la habitación del escriba Elisama. Jehudí
lo leyó a la vista del rey, y a la vista de todos los príncipes que
estaban junto al rey. \bibleverse{22} El rey estaba sentado en la casa
de invierno en el mes noveno, y había un fuego en el brasero ardiendo
ante él. \bibleverse{23} Cuando Jehudí hubo leído tres o cuatro
columnas, el rey lo cortó con el cortaplumas y lo echó al fuego que
había en el brasero, hasta que todo el rollo se consumió en el fuego que
había en el brasero. \bibleverse{24} El rey y sus siervos, al oír todas
estas palabras, no tuvieron miedo y no se rasgaron las vestiduras.
\footnote{\textbf{36:24} 2Re 22,11} \bibleverse{25} Además, Elnatán,
Delaías y Gemarías habían intercedido ante el rey para que no quemara el
rollo, pero él no los escuchó. \bibleverse{26} El rey ordenó a Jerameel,
hijo del rey, y a Seraías, hijo de Azriel, y a Selemías, hijo de Abdeel,
que detuvieran al escriba Baruc y al profeta Jeremías, pero el Señor los
escondió.

\hypertarget{renovaciuxf3n-del-libro-y-la-amenaza-de-dios-a-joacim}{%
\subsection{Renovación del libro y la amenaza de Dios a
Joacim}\label{renovaciuxf3n-del-libro-y-la-amenaza-de-dios-a-joacim}}

\bibleverse{27} Entonces vino la palabra de Yavé a Jeremías, después de
que el rey quemó el rollo, y las palabras que Baruc escribió en boca de
Jeremías, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{36:27} Jer 36,4} \bibleverse{28}
``Vuelve a tomar otro rollo y escribe en él todas las palabras
anteriores que estaban en el primer rollo, que Joacim, rey de Judá, ha
quemado. \bibleverse{29} Sobre Joacim, rey de Judá, dirás: ``Yahvé dice:
``Tú has quemado este rollo, diciendo: ``¿Por qué has escrito en él,
diciendo: `El rey de Babilonia vendrá ciertamente a destruir esta
tierra, y hará desaparecer de ella a hombres y animales?''\,''.
\footnote{\textbf{36:29} Jer 25,9-11; Jer 7,20; Jer 9,10}
\bibleverse{30} Por eso dice Yahvé sobre Joacim, rey de Judá: ``No
tendrá quien se siente en el trono de David. Su cadáver será arrojado de
día al calor, y de noche a la helada. \footnote{\textbf{36:30} Jer 22,19}
\bibleverse{31} Lo castigaré a él, a su descendencia y a sus siervos por
su iniquidad. Traeré sobre ellos, sobre los habitantes de Jerusalén y
sobre los hombres de Judá, todo el mal que he pronunciado contra ellos,
pero no escucharon''.

\bibleverse{32} Entonces Jeremías tomó otro rollo y se lo dio a Baruc,
el escriba hijo de Nerías, quien escribió en él, de boca de Jeremías,
todas las palabras del libro que Joacim, rey de Judá, había quemado en
el fuego; y se les añadieron muchas palabras similares.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{make-the-book-and-read-it-to-people-and-superiors}{%
\subsection{Make the book and read it to people and
superiors}\label{make-the-book-and-read-it-to-people-and-superiors}}

\hypertarget{section-71}{%
\section{36}\label{section-71}}

\bibleverse{1} In the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king
of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, \bibleverse{2}
``Take a scroll of a book, and write in it all the words that I have
spoken to you against Israel, against Judah, and against all the
nations, from the day I spoke to you, from the days of Josiah even to
this day. \bibleverse{3} It may be that the house of Judah will hear all
the evil which I intend to do to them, that they may each return from
his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.''
\bibleverse{4} Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah; and Baruch
wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all Yahweh's words, which he had spoken
to him, on a scroll of a book. \bibleverse{5} Jeremiah commanded Baruch,
saying, ``I am restricted. I can't go into Yahweh's house.
\bibleverse{6} Therefore you go, and read from the scroll which you have
written from my mouth, Yahweh's words, in the ears of the people in
Yahweh's house on the fast day. Also you shall read them in the ears of
all Judah who come out of their cities. \bibleverse{7} It may be they
will present their supplication before Yahweh, and will each return from
his evil way; for Yahweh has pronounced great anger and wrath against
this people.'' \bibleverse{8} Baruch the son of Neriah did according to
all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book
Yahweh's words in Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{9} Now in the fifth year
of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, all
the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came from the cities of
Judah to Jerusalem, proclaimed a fast before Yahweh. \bibleverse{10}
Then Baruch read the words of Jeremiah from the book in Yahweh's house,
in the room of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the upper
court, at the entry of the new gate of Yahweh's house, in the ears of
all the people. \bibleverse{11} When Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the
son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all Yahweh's words,
\bibleverse{12} he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's
room; and behold, all the princes were sitting there, Elishama the
scribe, Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, Elnathan the son of Achbor,
Gemariah the son of Shaphan, Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the
princes. \bibleverse{13} Then Micaiah declared to them all the words
that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.
\bibleverse{14} Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of
Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch, saying,
``Take in your hand the scroll in which you have read in the ears of the
people, and come.'' So Baruch the son of Neriah took the scroll in his
hand, and came to them. \bibleverse{15} They said to him, ``Sit down
now, and read it in our hearing.'' So Baruch read it in their hearing.
\bibleverse{16} Now when they had heard all the words, they turned in
fear one toward another, and said to Baruch, ``We will surely tell the
king of all these words.'' \bibleverse{17} They asked Baruch, saying,
``Tell us now, how did you write all these words at his mouth?''
\bibleverse{18} Then Baruch answered them, ``He dictated all these words
to me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.''
\bibleverse{19} Then the princes said to Baruch, ``You and Jeremiah go
hide. Don't let anyone know where you are.''

\hypertarget{king-jehoiakim-cuts-and-burns-the-divination-book-of-jeremiah}{%
\subsection{King Jehoiakim cuts and burns the divination book of
Jeremiah}\label{king-jehoiakim-cuts-and-burns-the-divination-book-of-jeremiah}}

\bibleverse{20} They went in to the king into the court, but they had
laid up the scroll in the room of Elishama the scribe. Then they told
all the words in the hearing of the king. \bibleverse{21} So the king
sent Jehudi to get the scroll, and he took it out of the room of
Elishama the scribe. Jehudi read it in the hearing of the king, and in
the hearing of all the princes who stood beside the king.
\bibleverse{22} Now the king was sitting in the winter house in the
ninth month, and there was a fire in the brazier burning before him.
\bibleverse{23} When Jehudi had read three or four columns, the king cut
it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was in the brazier,
until all the scroll was consumed in the fire that was in the brazier.
\bibleverse{24} The king and his servants who heard all these words were
not afraid, and didn't tear their garments. \bibleverse{25} Moreover
Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that
he would not burn the scroll; but he would not listen to them.
\bibleverse{26} The king commanded Jerahmeel the king's son, and Seraiah
the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to arrest Baruch the
scribe and Jeremiah the prophet; but Yahweh hid them.

\hypertarget{renewal-of-the-book-and-gods-threat-to-jehoiakim}{%
\subsection{Renewal of the book and God's threat to
Jehoiakim}\label{renewal-of-the-book-and-gods-threat-to-jehoiakim}}

\bibleverse{27} Then Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah, after the king had
burned the scroll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of
Jeremiah, saying, \bibleverse{28} ``Take again another scroll, and write
in it all the former words that were in the first scroll, which
Jehoiakim the king of Judah has burned. \bibleverse{29} Concerning
Jehoiakim king of Judah you shall say, `Yahweh says: ``You have burned
this scroll, saying, ``Why have you written therein, saying, `The king
of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land, and will cause to
cease from there man and animal?'\,''\,' \bibleverse{30} Therefore
Yahweh says concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: ``He will have no one to
sit on David's throne. His dead body will be cast out in the day to the
heat, and in the night to the frost. \bibleverse{31} I will punish him,
his offspring, and his servants for their iniquity. I will bring on
them, on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and on the men of Judah, all the
evil that I have pronounced against them, but they didn't
listen.''\,'\,'' \bibleverse{32} Then Jeremiah took another scroll, and
gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote therein from
the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of
Judah had burned in the fire; and many similar words were added to them.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{respuesta-de-jeremuxedas-a-la-embajada-de-sedechuxeeas}{%
\subsection{Respuesta de Jeremías a la embajada de
Sedechîas}\label{respuesta-de-jeremuxedas-a-la-embajada-de-sedechuxeeas}}

\hypertarget{section-72}{%
\section{37}\label{section-72}}

\bibleverse{1} Sedecías, hijo de Josías, reinó en lugar de Conías, hijo
de Joacim, a quien Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, hizo rey en el país
de Judá. \footnote{\textbf{37:1} 2Re 24,17} \bibleverse{2} Pero ni él,
ni sus siervos, ni el pueblo del país, escucharon las palabras de Yavé,
que habló por medio del profeta Jeremías.

\bibleverse{3} El rey Sedequías envió al profeta Jeremías a Jehucal,
hijo de Selemías, y a Sofonías, hijo de Maasías, el sacerdote, diciendo:
``Ruega ahora por nosotros a Yavé, nuestro Dios''. \footnote{\textbf{37:3}
  Jer 42,2; Is 37,4}

\bibleverse{4} Jeremías entró y salió en medio del pueblo, pues no lo
habían encarcelado. \bibleverse{5} El ejército del Faraón había salido
de Egipto; y cuando los caldeos que estaban sitiando Jerusalén tuvieron
noticias de ellos, se retiraron de Jerusalén.

\bibleverse{6} Entonces llegó la palabra de Yahvé al profeta Jeremías,
diciendo: \bibleverse{7} ``Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``Dirás al
rey de Judá, que te ha enviado a consultarme ``He aquí que el ejército
del faraón, que ha salido en tu ayuda, volverá a Egipto a su propia
tierra. \bibleverse{8} Los caldeos vendrán de nuevo y lucharán contra
esta ciudad. La tomarán y la quemarán con fuego''.

\bibleverse{9} ``Dice el Señor: `No se engañen diciendo: ``Los caldeos
seguramente se alejarán de nosotros'', porque no se alejarán.
\bibleverse{10} Porque aunque ustedes hayan golpeado a todo el ejército
de los caldeos que luchan contra ustedes, y sólo queden entre ellos
hombres heridos, cada uno se levantaría en su tienda y quemaría esta
ciudad con fuego.'\,''

\hypertarget{arresto-y-encarcelamiento-de-jeremuxedas-por-un-oficial-militar}{%
\subsection{Arresto y encarcelamiento de Jeremías por un oficial
militar}\label{arresto-y-encarcelamiento-de-jeremuxedas-por-un-oficial-militar}}

\bibleverse{11} Cuando el ejército de los caldeos se retiró de Jerusalén
por temor al ejército del faraón, \bibleverse{12} entonces Jeremías
salió de Jerusalén para ir a la tierra de Benjamín, para recibir allí su
parte, en medio del pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{37:12} Jer 32,9}
\bibleverse{13} Cuando estaba en la puerta de Benjamín, estaba allí un
capitán de la guardia que se llamaba Irías, hijo de Selemías, hijo de
Jananías, y agarró al profeta Jeremías diciendo: ``¡Te estás pasando a
los caldeos!''

\bibleverse{14} Entonces Jeremías dijo: ``¡Eso es falso! No estoy
desertando a los caldeos''. Pero él no le hizo caso; así que Irías
agarró a Jeremías y lo llevó a los príncipes. \bibleverse{15} Los
príncipes se enojaron con Jeremías, lo golpearon y lo metieron en la
cárcel, en la casa del escriba Jonatán, pues habían hecho de esa la
cárcel. \footnote{\textbf{37:15} Jer 20,2}

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-interrogado-nuevamente-por-el-rey-y-llevado-de-la-cuxe1rcel-al-patio-de-la-guardia}{%
\subsection{Jeremías interrogado nuevamente por el rey y llevado de la
cárcel al patio de la
guardia}\label{jeremuxedas-interrogado-nuevamente-por-el-rey-y-llevado-de-la-cuxe1rcel-al-patio-de-la-guardia}}

\bibleverse{16} Cuando Jeremías entró en la casa del calabozo y en las
celdas, y Jeremías había permanecido allí muchos días, \bibleverse{17}
entonces el rey Sedequías envió y lo hizo sacar. El rey le preguntó en
secreto en su casa: ``¿Hay alguna palabra de Yahvé?'' Jeremías dijo:
``Lo hay''. También dijo: ``Serán entregados a la mano del rey de
Babilonia''. \footnote{\textbf{37:17} Jer 34,21}

\bibleverse{18} Además, Jeremías dijo al rey Sedequías: ``¿En qué he
pecado contra ti, contra tus siervos o contra este pueblo, para que me
hayas puesto en prisión? \bibleverse{19} ¿Dónde están tus profetas que
te profetizaron diciendo: `El rey de Babilonia no vendrá contra ti, ni
contra esta tierra'? \bibleverse{20} Ahora, por favor, escucha, mi señor
el rey: por favor, deja que mi súplica sea presentada ante ti, para que
no me hagas volver a la casa de Jonatán el escriba, para que no muera
allí.''

\bibleverse{21} Entonces el rey Sedequías dio la orden, y encerraron a
Jeremías en el patio de la guardia. Cada día le daban una hogaza de pan
de la calle de los panaderos, hasta que se acabó todo el pan de la
ciudad. Así permaneció Jeremías en el patio de la guardia. \footnote{\textbf{37:21}
  Jer 32,2}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-reply-to-zedekiahs-embassy}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's reply to Zedekiah's
embassy}\label{jeremiahs-reply-to-zedekiahs-embassy}}

\hypertarget{section-73}{%
\section{37}\label{section-73}}

\bibleverse{1} Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king instead of
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made
king in the land of Judah. \bibleverse{2} But neither he, nor his
servants, nor the people of the land, listened to Yahweh's words, which
he spoke by the prophet Jeremiah. \bibleverse{3} Zedekiah the king sent
Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the
priest, to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, ``Pray now to Yahweh our God
for us.'' \bibleverse{4} Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the
people, for they had not put him into prison. \bibleverse{5} Pharaoh's
army had come out of Egypt; and when the Chaldeans who were besieging
Jerusalem heard news of them, they withdrew from Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{6} Then Yahweh's word came to the prophet Jeremiah, saying,
\bibleverse{7} ``Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, `You shall tell the
king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: ``Behold, Pharaoh's
army, which has come out to help you, will return to Egypt into their
own land. \bibleverse{8} The Chaldeans will come again, and fight
against this city. They will take it and burn it with fire.''\,'
\bibleverse{9} ``Yahweh says, `Don't deceive yourselves, saying, ``The
Chaldeans will surely depart from us;'' for they will not depart.
\bibleverse{10} For though you had struck the whole army of the
Chaldeans who fight against you, and only wounded men remained among
them, they would each rise up in his tent and burn this city with
fire.'\,''

\hypertarget{arrest-and-imprisonment-of-jeremiah-by-a-military-officer}{%
\subsection{Arrest and imprisonment of Jeremiah by a military
officer}\label{arrest-and-imprisonment-of-jeremiah-by-a-military-officer}}

\bibleverse{11} When the army of the Chaldeans had withdrawn from
Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army, \bibleverse{12} then Jeremiah went
out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to receive his portion
there, in the middle of the people. \bibleverse{13} When he was in
Benjamin's gate, a captain of the guard was there, whose name was
Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he seized
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, ``You are defecting to the Chaldeans!''
\bibleverse{14} Then Jeremiah said, ``That is false! I am not defecting
to the Chaldeans.'' But he didn't listen to him; so Irijah seized
Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes. \bibleverse{15} The princes
were angry with Jeremiah, and struck him, and put him in prison in the
house of Jonathan the scribe; for they had made that the prison.

\hypertarget{jeremiah-questioned-again-by-the-king-and-taken-from-the-prison-to-the-court-of-the-guard}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah questioned again by the king and taken from the
prison to the court of the
guard}\label{jeremiah-questioned-again-by-the-king-and-taken-from-the-prison-to-the-court-of-the-guard}}

\bibleverse{16} When Jeremiah had come into the dungeon house and into
the cells, and Jeremiah had remained there many days, \bibleverse{17}
then Zedekiah the king sent and had him brought out. The king asked him
secretly in his house, ``Is there any word from Yahweh?'' Jeremiah said,
``There is.'' He also said, ``You will be delivered into the hand of the
king of Babylon.'' \bibleverse{18} Moreover Jeremiah said to King
Zedekiah, ``How have I sinned against you, against your servants, or
against this people, that you have put me in prison? \bibleverse{19} Now
where are your prophets who prophesied to you, saying, `The king of
Babylon will not come against you, nor against this land?'
\bibleverse{20} Now please hear, my lord the king: please let my
supplication be presented before you, that you not cause me to return to
the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.'' \bibleverse{21}
Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and they committed Jeremiah into the
court of the guard. They gave him daily a loaf of bread out of the
bakers' street, until all the bread in the city was gone. Thus Jeremiah
remained in the court of the guard.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-arrojado-a-una-cisterna-como-traidor-por-los-superiores}{%
\subsection{Jeremías arrojado a una cisterna como traidor por los
superiores}\label{jeremuxedas-arrojado-a-una-cisterna-como-traidor-por-los-superiores}}

\hypertarget{section-74}{%
\section{38}\label{section-74}}

\bibleverse{1} Sefatías, hijo de Matán, Gedalías, hijo de Pasjur, Jucal,
hijo de Selemías, y Pasjur, hijo de Malquías, oyeron las palabras que
Jeremías dirigió a todo el pueblo, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{38:1} Jer
  21,1} \bibleverse{2} ``Yahvé dice: `El que se quede en esta ciudad
morirá por la espada, por el hambre y por la peste, pero el que salga
hacia los caldeos vivirá. Escapará con vida y vivirá'. \footnote{\textbf{38:2}
  Jer 21,9} \bibleverse{3} Yahvé dice: `Esta ciudad será seguramente
entregada en manos del ejército del rey de Babilonia, y él la
tomará'\,''.

\bibleverse{4} Entonces los príncipes dijeron al rey: ``Por favor, haz
que este hombre muera, porque debilita las manos de los hombres de
guerra que permanecen en esta ciudad, y las manos de todo el pueblo, al
decirles tales palabras; porque este hombre no busca el bienestar de
este pueblo, sino el daño.'' \footnote{\textbf{38:4} Am 7,10}

\bibleverse{5} El rey Sedequías dijo: ``He aquí que está en tu mano,
pues el rey no puede hacer nada para oponerse a ti''.

\bibleverse{6} Entonces tomaron a Jeremías y lo arrojaron al calabozo de
Malquías, hijo del rey, que estaba en el patio de la guardia. Bajaron a
Jeremías con cuerdas. En el calabozo no había agua, sino lodo; y
Jeremías se hundió en el lodo.

\hypertarget{el-rescate-de-jeremuxedas-por-el-etuxedope-ebedmelec}{%
\subsection{El rescate de Jeremías por el etíope
Ebedmelec}\label{el-rescate-de-jeremuxedas-por-el-etuxedope-ebedmelec}}

\bibleverse{7} Cuando Ebedmelec el etíope, que estaba en la casa del
rey, se enteró de que habían metido a Jeremías en la mazmorra (el rey
estaba entonces sentado en la puerta de Benjamín), \footnote{\textbf{38:7}
  Jer 39,16} \bibleverse{8} Ebedmelec salió de la casa del rey y habló
al rey, diciendo: \bibleverse{9} ``Mi señor el rey, estos hombres han
hecho mal en todo lo que han hecho al profeta Jeremías, al que han
metido en la mazmorra. Es probable que muera en el lugar donde está, a
causa del hambre, pues ya no hay pan en la ciudad.''

\bibleverse{10} Entonces el rey ordenó a Ebedmelec el etíope, diciendo:
``Toma de aquí treinta hombres contigo y saca al profeta Jeremías del
calabozo, antes de que muera.''

\bibleverse{11} Entonces Ebedmelec tomó a los hombres con él y entró en
la casa del rey, debajo de la tesorería, y tomó de allí trapos y
vestidos gastados, y los hizo bajar con cuerdas al calabozo para
Jeremías. \bibleverse{12} Ebedmelec el etíope le dijo a Jeremías:
``Ahora pon estos trapos y prendas gastadas bajo tus axilas, debajo de
las cuerdas''. Jeremías así lo hizo. \bibleverse{13} Así que levantaron
a Jeremías con las cuerdas y lo sacaron del calabozo, y Jeremías se
quedó en el patio de la guardia.

\hypertarget{el-uxfaltimo-encuentro-secreto-de-jeremuxedas-con-el-rey}{%
\subsection{El último encuentro secreto de Jeremías con el
rey}\label{el-uxfaltimo-encuentro-secreto-de-jeremuxedas-con-el-rey}}

\bibleverse{14} Entonces el rey Sedequías envió y llevó al profeta
Jeremías a la tercera entrada que está en la casa de Yahvé. Entonces el
rey le dijo a Jeremías: ``Te voy a pedir algo. No me ocultes nada''.

\bibleverse{15} Entonces Jeremías dijo a Sedequías: ``Si te lo declaro,
¿no me matarás seguramente? Si te doy un consejo, no me escucharás''.

\bibleverse{16} Entonces el rey Sedequías juró en secreto a Jeremías,
diciendo: ``Vive Yahvé, que hizo nuestras almas, que no te mataré, ni te
entregaré en manos de estos hombres que buscan tu vida.'' \footnote{\textbf{38:16}
  Jer 38,4-5}

\bibleverse{17} Entonces Jeremías dijo a Sedequías: ``Yahvé, el Dios de
los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: `Si sales a los príncipes del
rey de Babilonia, entonces tu alma vivirá, y esta ciudad no será quemada
por el fuego. Vivirás, junto con tu casa. \bibleverse{18} Pero si no
sales con los príncipes del rey de Babilonia, esta ciudad será entregada
en manos de los caldeos, y ellos la quemarán con fuego, y tú no
escaparás de sus manos'\,''.

\bibleverse{19} El rey Sedequías dijo a Jeremías: ``Tengo miedo de los
judíos que han desertado a los caldeos, no sea que me entreguen en sus
manos y se burlen de mí.''

\bibleverse{20} Pero Jeremías dijo: ``No te librarán. Obedece, te ruego,
la voz de Yahvé en lo que te digo; así te irá bien y tu alma vivirá.
\bibleverse{21} Pero si te niegas a salir, ésta es la palabra que Yahvé
me ha mostrado: \bibleverse{22} `He aquí que todas las mujeres que
quedan en la casa del rey de Judá serán sacadas ante los príncipes del
rey de Babilonia, y esas mujeres dirán, ``Tus amigos conocidos se han
vuelto contra ti, y han prevalecido sobre ti. Tus pies están hundidos en
el fango, se han alejado de ti''. \footnote{\textbf{38:22} Jer 6,14}

\bibleverse{23} Llevarán a los caldeos a todas tus mujeres y a tus
hijos. No escaparás de sus manos, sino que serás tomado por la mano del
rey de Babilonia. Harán que esta ciudad sea quemada con fuego'\,''.
\footnote{\textbf{38:23} Jer 32,4; Jer 34,3}

\hypertarget{por-orden-del-rey-jeremuxedas-oculta-el-contenido-de-la-conversaciuxf3n-a-los-superiores}{%
\subsection{Por orden del rey, Jeremías oculta el contenido de la
conversación a los
superiores}\label{por-orden-del-rey-jeremuxedas-oculta-el-contenido-de-la-conversaciuxf3n-a-los-superiores}}

\bibleverse{24} Entonces Sedequías dijo a Jeremías: ``Que nadie sepa de
estas palabras, y no morirás. \bibleverse{25} Pero si los príncipes se
enteran de que he hablado contigo, y vienen a ti y te dicen: `Decláranos
ahora lo que has dicho al rey; no nos lo ocultes, y no te haremos morir;
dinos también lo que te ha dicho el rey'; \bibleverse{26} entonces les
dirás: `He presentado mi súplica ante el rey, para que no me haga volver
a la casa de Jonatán, para morir allí'.''

\bibleverse{27} Entonces todos los príncipes vinieron a Jeremías y le
preguntaron, y él les respondió según todas estas palabras que el rey
había ordenado. Entonces dejaron de hablar con él, porque el asunto no
se percibía.

\bibleverse{28} Así que Jeremías se quedó en el patio de la guardia
hasta el día en que Jerusalén fue tomada. \footnote{\textbf{38:28} Jer
  37,21}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiah-thrown-into-a-cistern-as-a-traitor-by-superiors}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah thrown into a cistern as a traitor by
superiors}\label{jeremiah-thrown-into-a-cistern-as-a-traitor-by-superiors}}

\hypertarget{section-75}{%
\section{38}\label{section-75}}

\bibleverse{1} Shephatiah the son of Mattan, Gedaliah the son of
Pashhur, Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur the son of Malchijah
heard the words that Jeremiah spoke to all the people, saying,
\bibleverse{2} ``Yahweh says, `He who remains in this city will die by
the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, but he who goes out to
the Chaldeans will live. He will escape with his life and he will live.'
\bibleverse{3} Yahweh says, `This city will surely be given into the
hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he will take it.'\,''
\bibleverse{4} Then the princes said to the king, ``Please let this man
be put to death, because he weakens the hands of the men of war who
remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such
words to them; for this man doesn't seek the welfare of this people, but
harm.'' \bibleverse{5} Zedekiah the king said, ``Behold, he is in your
hand; for the king can't do anything to oppose you.'' \bibleverse{6}
Then they took Jeremiah and threw him into the dungeon of Malchijah the
king's son, that was in the court of the guard. They let down Jeremiah
with cords. In the dungeon there was no water, but mire; and Jeremiah
sank in the mire.

\hypertarget{the-rescue-of-jeremiah-by-the-ethiopian-ebedmelec}{%
\subsection{The rescue of Jeremiah by the Ethiopian
Ebedmelec}\label{the-rescue-of-jeremiah-by-the-ethiopian-ebedmelec}}

\bibleverse{7} Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, a eunuch, who was in
the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon (the
king was then sitting in Benjamin's gate), \bibleverse{8} Ebedmelech
went out of the king's house, and spoke to the king, saying,
\bibleverse{9} ``My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that
they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the
dungeon. He is likely to die in the place where he is, because of the
famine; for there is no more bread in the city.'' \bibleverse{10} Then
the king commanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, ``Take from here
thirty men with you, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the
dungeon, before he dies.'' \bibleverse{11} So Ebedmelech took the men
with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and
took from there rags and worn-out garments, and let them down by cords
into the dungeon to Jeremiah. \bibleverse{12} Ebedmelech the Ethiopian
said to Jeremiah, ``Now put these rags and worn-out garments under your
armpits under the cords.'' Jeremiah did so. \bibleverse{13} So they
lifted Jeremiah up with the cords, and took him up out of the dungeon;
and Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-last-secret-meeting-with-the-king}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's last secret meeting with the
king}\label{jeremiahs-last-secret-meeting-with-the-king}}

\bibleverse{14} Then Zedekiah the king sent and took Jeremiah the
prophet to himself into the third entry that is in Yahweh's house. Then
the king said to Jeremiah, ``I will ask you something. Hide nothing from
me.'' \bibleverse{15} Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, ``If I declare it
to you, will you not surely put me to death? If I give you counsel, you
will not listen to me.'' \bibleverse{16} So Zedekiah the king swore
secretly to Jeremiah, saying, ``As Yahweh lives, who made our souls, I
will not put you to death, neither will I give you into the hand of
these men who seek your life.'' \bibleverse{17} Then Jeremiah said to
Zedekiah, ``Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `If you
will go out to the king of Babylon's princes, then your soul will live,
and this city will not be burned with fire. You will live, along with
your house. \bibleverse{18} But if you will not go out to the king of
Babylon's princes, then this city will be given into the hand of the
Chaldeans, and they will burn it with fire, and you won't escape out of
their hand.'\,'' \bibleverse{19} Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah, ``I
am afraid of the Jews who have defected to the Chaldeans, lest they
deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.'' \bibleverse{20} But
Jeremiah said, ``They won't deliver you. Obey, I beg you, Yahweh's
voice, in that which I speak to you; so it will be well with you, and
your soul will live. \bibleverse{21} But if you refuse to go out, this
is the word that Yahweh has shown me: \bibleverse{22} `Behold, all the
women who are left in the king of Judah's house will be brought out to
the king of Babylon's princes, and those women will say, ``Your familiar
friends have turned on you, and have prevailed over you. Your feet are
sunk in the mire, they have turned away from you.'' \bibleverse{23} They
will bring out all your wives and your children to the Chaldeans. You
won't escape out of their hand, but will be taken by the hand of the
king of Babylon. You will cause this city to be burned with fire.'\,''

\hypertarget{by-order-of-the-king-jeremiah-hides-the-content-of-the-conversation-from-superiors}{%
\subsection{By order of the king, Jeremiah hides the content of the
conversation from
superiors}\label{by-order-of-the-king-jeremiah-hides-the-content-of-the-conversation-from-superiors}}

\bibleverse{24} Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, ``Let no man know of
these words, and you won't die. \bibleverse{25} But if the princes hear
that I have talked with you, and they come to you, and tell you,
`Declare to us now what you have said to the king; don't hide it from
us, and we will not put you to death; also tell us what the king said to
you;' \bibleverse{26} then you shall tell them, `I presented my
supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to
Jonathan's house, to die there.'\,'' \bibleverse{27} Then all the
princes came to Jeremiah, and asked him; and he told them according to
all these words that the king had commanded. So they stopped speaking
with him, for the matter was not perceived. \bibleverse{28} So Jeremiah
stayed in the court of the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-fortuna-de-jeremuxedas-al-conquistar-jerusaluxe9n-el-destino-de-sedequuxedas-asuxed-como-la-ciudad-y-el-pauxeds}{%
\subsection{La fortuna de Jeremías al conquistar Jerusalén; El destino
de Sedequías, así como la ciudad y el
país}\label{la-fortuna-de-jeremuxedas-al-conquistar-jerusaluxe9n-el-destino-de-sedequuxedas-asuxed-como-la-ciudad-y-el-pauxeds}}

\hypertarget{section-76}{%
\section{39}\label{section-76}}

\bibleverse{1} En el noveno año de Sedequías, rey de Judá, en el décimo
mes, Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, y todo su ejército, vinieron
contra Jerusalén y la sitiaron. \bibleverse{2} En el undécimo año de
Sedequías, en el cuarto mes, a los nueve días del mes, se abrió una
brecha en la ciudad. \bibleverse{3} Todos los príncipes del rey de
Babilonia entraron y se sentaron en la puerta del medio: Nergal
Sharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim el Rabsaris, Nergal Sharezer el Rabmag,
con todos los demás príncipes del rey de Babilonia. \bibleverse{4}
Cuando los vio Sedequías, rey de Judá, y todos los hombres de guerra,
huyeron y salieron de la ciudad de noche, por el camino del jardín del
rey, por la puerta entre los dos muros; y salió hacia el Arabá.

\bibleverse{5} Pero el ejército de los caldeos los persiguió y alcanzó a
Sedequías en las llanuras de Jericó. Cuando lo apresaron, lo llevaron
ante Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, a Riblá, en el país de Hamat, y
éste pronunció un juicio sobre él. \bibleverse{6} Entonces el rey de
Babilonia mató a los hijos de Sedequías en Ribla ante sus ojos. El rey
de Babilonia también mató a todos los nobles de Judá. \bibleverse{7}
Además, le sacó los ojos a Sedequías y lo ató con grilletes para
llevarlo a Babilonia.

\bibleverse{8} Los caldeos incendiaron la casa del rey y las casas del
pueblo y derribaron los muros de Jerusalén. \bibleverse{9} Entonces
Nabuzaradán, capitán de la guardia, llevó cautivo a Babilonia al resto
del pueblo que había quedado en la ciudad, a los desertores que se le
habían entregado y al resto del pueblo que había quedado.
\bibleverse{10} Pero Nabuzaradán, capitán de la guardia, dejó a los
pobres del pueblo, que no tenían nada, en la tierra de Judá, y les dio
al mismo tiempo viñas y campos.

\hypertarget{buen-trato-a-jeremuxedas-por-parte-de-los-caldeos}{%
\subsection{Buen trato a Jeremías por parte de los
caldeos}\label{buen-trato-a-jeremuxedas-por-parte-de-los-caldeos}}

\bibleverse{11} Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, ordenó a Nabuzaradán,
capitán de la guardia, acerca de Jeremías, diciendo: \bibleverse{12}
``Tómalo y cuídalo. No le hagas ningún daño, sino haz con él lo que te
diga''.

\bibleverse{13} Entonces Nabuzaradán, el capitán de la guardia,
Nabusazbán, Rabsaris y Nergal Sharezer, Rabmag y todos los oficiales
principales del rey de Babilonia \bibleverse{14} enviaron y sacaron a
Jeremías del patio de la guardia, y lo entregaron a Gedalías, hijo de
Ajicam, hijo de Safán, para que lo llevara a su casa. Así vivió entre el
pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{39:14} Jer 38,28; Jer 40,5-6}

\hypertarget{hechizo-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-el-etuxedope-ebedmelech}{%
\subsection{Hechizo de salvación para el etíope
Ebedmelech}\label{hechizo-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-el-etuxedope-ebedmelech}}

\bibleverse{15} La palabra de Yavé vino a Jeremías mientras estaba
encerrado en el patio de la guardia, diciendo: \bibleverse{16} ``Ve y
habla a Ebedmelec el etíope, diciendo: ``Dice Yavé de los Ejércitos, el
Dios de Israel: ``He aquí que yo traigo mis palabras sobre esta ciudad
para mal y no para bien, y se cumplirán ante ti en aquel día.
\footnote{\textbf{39:16} Jer 38,7} \bibleverse{17} Pero yo te libraré en
ese día --- dice el Señor --- y no serás entregada en manos de los
hombres a quienes temes. \bibleverse{18} Porque ciertamente te salvaré.
No caerás a espada, sino que escaparás con vida, porque has puesto tu
confianza en mí'', dice Yahvé''. \footnote{\textbf{39:18} Job 5,20}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-fortune-in-conquering-jerusalem-the-fate-of-zedekiah-as-well-as-the-city-and-country}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's fortune in conquering Jerusalem; The fate of
Zedekiah, as well as the city and
country}\label{jeremiahs-fortune-in-conquering-jerusalem-the-fate-of-zedekiah-as-well-as-the-city-and-country}}

\hypertarget{section-77}{%
\section{39}\label{section-77}}

\bibleverse{1} In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth
month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army came against
Jerusalem, and besieged it. \bibleverse{2} In the eleventh year of
Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was
made in the city. \bibleverse{3} All the princes of the king of Babylon
came in, and sat in the middle gate: Nergal Sharezer, Samgarnebo,
Sarsechim the Rabsaris, Nergal Sharezer the Rabmag, with all the rest of
the princes of the king of Babylon. \bibleverse{4} When Zedekiah the
king of Judah and all the men of war saw them, then they fled and went
out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, through the
gate between the two walls; and he went out toward the Arabah.
\bibleverse{5} But the army of the Chaldeans pursued them, and overtook
Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. When they had taken him, they brought
him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of
Hamath; and he pronounced judgment on him. \bibleverse{6} Then the king
of Babylon killed Zedekiah's sons in Riblah before his eyes. The king of
Babylon also killed all the nobles of Judah. \bibleverse{7} Moreover he
put out Zedekiah's eyes and bound him in fetters, to carry him to
Babylon. \bibleverse{8} The Chaldeans burned the king's house and the
people's houses with fire and broke down the walls of Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{9} Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away
captive into Babylon the rest of the people who remained in the city,
the deserters also who fell away to him, and the rest of the people who
remained. \bibleverse{10} But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left
of the poor of the people, who had nothing, in the land of Judah, and
gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.

\hypertarget{good-treatment-of-jeremiah-by-the-chaldeans}{%
\subsection{Good treatment of Jeremiah by the
Chaldeans}\label{good-treatment-of-jeremiah-by-the-chaldeans}}

\bibleverse{11} Now Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon commanded Nebuzaradan
the captain of the guard concerning Jeremiah, saying, \bibleverse{12}
``Take him and take care of him. Do him no harm; but do to him even as
he tells you.'' \bibleverse{13} So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard,
Nebushazban, Rabsaris, and Nergal Sharezer, Rabmag, and all the chief
officers of the king of Babylon \bibleverse{14} sent and took Jeremiah
out of the court of the guard, and committed him to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, that he should bring him home. So he lived
among the people.

\hypertarget{salvation-spell-for-ethiopian-ebedmelech}{%
\subsection{Salvation Spell for Ethiopian
Ebedmelech}\label{salvation-spell-for-ethiopian-ebedmelech}}

\bibleverse{15} Now Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah while he was shut up
in the court of the guard, saying, \bibleverse{16} ``Go, and speak to
Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, `Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel,
says: ``Behold, I will bring my words on this city for evil, and not for
good; and they will be accomplished before you in that day.
\bibleverse{17} But I will deliver you in that day,'' says Yahweh; ``and
you will not be given into the hand of the men of whom you are afraid.
\bibleverse{18} For I will surely save you. You won't fall by the sword,
but you will escape with your life, because you have put your trust in
me,'' says Yahweh.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{liberaciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-del-cautiverio-caldeo-y-regreso-al-gobernador-gedaluxedas}{%
\subsection{Liberación de Jeremías del cautiverio caldeo y regreso al
gobernador
Gedalías}\label{liberaciuxf3n-de-jeremuxedas-del-cautiverio-caldeo-y-regreso-al-gobernador-gedaluxedas}}

\hypertarget{section-78}{%
\section{40}\label{section-78}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra que vino a Jeremías de parte de Yavé, después que
Nabuzaradán, el capitán de la guardia, lo dejó ir desde Ramá, cuando lo
llevó atado con cadenas entre todos los cautivos de Jerusalén y de Judá
que fueron llevados a Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{40:1} Jer 39,11-14}
\bibleverse{2} El capitán de la guardia tomó a Jeremías y le dijo:
``Yahvé, tu Dios, pronunció este mal sobre este lugar; \bibleverse{3} y
Yahvé lo ha traído, y ha hecho lo que ha dicho. Porque ustedes han
pecado contra Yavé y no han obedecido su voz, por eso les ha sobrevenido
esto. \bibleverse{4} Ahora, he aquí que yo te libero hoy de las cadenas
que tienes en la mano. Si te parece bien venir conmigo a Babilonia, ven,
y yo te cuidaré; pero si te parece mal venir conmigo a Babilonia, no lo
hagas. He aquí que toda la tierra está ante ti. Donde te parezca bueno y
correcto ir, ve allí''. \bibleverse{5} Mientras tanto, él no había
regresado: ``Vuelve entonces --- dijo --- a Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam,
hijo de Safán, a quien el rey de Babilonia ha nombrado gobernador de las
ciudades de Judá, y habita con él en medio del pueblo; o vete a donde te
parezca bien ir.'' Entonces el capitán de la guardia le dio comida y un
regalo, y lo dejó ir. \footnote{\textbf{40:5} Jer 39,14} \bibleverse{6}
Entonces Jeremías se fue con Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam, a Mizpa, y vivió
con él entre el pueblo que había quedado en la tierra.

\hypertarget{gedalja-reuxfane-a-los-juduxedos-en-una-colonia-en-mizpah}{%
\subsection{Gedalja reúne a los judíos en una colonia en
Mizpah}\label{gedalja-reuxfane-a-los-juduxedos-en-una-colonia-en-mizpah}}

\bibleverse{7} Cuando todos los capitanes de las fuerzas que estaban en
el campo, ellos y sus hombres, oyeron que el rey de Babilonia había
puesto a Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam, como gobernador en el país, y que le
había encomendado hombres, mujeres, niños y de los más pobres del país
de los que no habían sido llevados cautivos a Babilonia, \footnote{\textbf{40:7}
  2Re 25,22-24} \bibleverse{8} entonces Ismael, hijo de Netanías, y
Johanán y Jonatán, hijos de Carea, y Seraías, hijo de Tanhumet, y los
hijos de Efai el netofita, y Jezanías, hijo del maacateo, vinieron a
Gedalías, a Mizpa, con sus hombres. \footnote{\textbf{40:8} Jer 41,1;
  Jer 41,11} \bibleverse{9} Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam, hijo de Safán, les
juró a ellos y a sus hombres, diciendo: ``No tengan miedo de servir a
los caldeos. Moren en la tierra y sirvan al rey de Babilonia, y les irá
bien. \bibleverse{10} En cuanto a mí, he aquí que yo habitaré en Mizpa,
para presentarme ante los caldeos que vendrán a nosotros; pero ustedes,
recojan vino y frutos de verano y aceite, y pónganlos en sus
recipientes, y habiten en sus ciudades que han tomado.''

\bibleverse{11} Asimismo, cuando todos los judíos que estaban en Moab, y
entre los hijos de Amón, y en Edom, y que estaban en todos los países,
oyeron que el rey de Babilonia había dejado un remanente de Judá, y que
había puesto al frente de ellos a Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam, hijo de
Safán, \bibleverse{12} entonces todos los judíos volvieron de todos los
lugares adonde habían sido expulsados, y vinieron a la tierra de Judá, a
Gedalías, a Mizpa, y recogieron mucho vino y frutos de verano.

\hypertarget{gedaluxedas-asesinada-por-ismael}{%
\subsection{Gedalías asesinada por
Ismael}\label{gedaluxedas-asesinada-por-ismael}}

\bibleverse{13} Además, Johanán, hijo de Carea, y todos los capitanes de
las fuerzas que estaban en el campo, vinieron a Gedalías a Mizpa,
\bibleverse{14} y le dijeron: ``¿Sabes que Baalis, el rey de los hijos
de Amón, ha enviado a Ismael, hijo de Netanías, para quitarte la vida?''
Pero Gedaliah, hijo de Ahikam, no les creyó.

\bibleverse{15} Entonces Johanán, hijo de Carea, habló a Gedalías en
Mizpa en secreto, diciendo: ``Por favor, déjame ir, y mataré a Ismael,
hijo de Netanías, y nadie lo sabrá. ¿Por qué ha de quitarte la vida,
para que se dispersen todos los judíos que se han reunido contigo, y
perezca el resto de Judá?''

\bibleverse{16} Pero Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam, dijo a Johanán, hijo de
Carea: ``No harás esto, porque hablas falsamente de Ismael.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{liberation-of-jeremiah-from-chaldean-captivity-and-return-to-governor-gedaliah}{%
\subsection{Liberation of Jeremiah from Chaldean captivity and return to
Governor
Gedaliah}\label{liberation-of-jeremiah-from-chaldean-captivity-and-return-to-governor-gedaliah}}

\hypertarget{section-79}{%
\section{40}\label{section-79}}

\bibleverse{1} The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, after
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he
had taken him being bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem
and Judah who were carried away captive to Babylon. \bibleverse{2} The
captain of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him, ``Yahweh your God
pronounced this evil on this place; \bibleverse{3} and Yahweh has
brought it, and done according as he spoke. Because you have sinned
against Yahweh, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing has
come on you. \bibleverse{4} Now, behold, I release you today from the
chains which are on your hand. If it seems good to you to come with me
into Babylon, come, and I will take care of you; but if it seems bad to
you to come with me into Babylon, don't. Behold, all the land is before
you. Where it seems good and right to you to go, go there.''
\bibleverse{5} Now while he had not yet gone back, ``Go back then,'' he
said, ``to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king
of Babylon has made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with
him among the people; or go wherever it seems right to you to go.'' So
the captain of the guard gave him food and a present, and let him go.
\bibleverse{6} Then Jeremiah went to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to
Mizpah, and lived with him among the people who were left in the land.

\hypertarget{gedalja-gathers-jews-in-a-colony-in-mizpah}{%
\subsection{Gedalja gathers Jews in a colony in
Mizpah}\label{gedalja-gathers-jews-in-a-colony-in-mizpah}}

\bibleverse{7} Now when all the captains of the forces who were in the
fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed to
him men, women, children, and of the poorest of the land, of those who
were not carried away captive to Babylon, \bibleverse{8} then Ishmael
the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and
Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite,
and Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men came to
Gedaliah to Mizpah. \bibleverse{9} Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan swore to them and to their men, saying, ``Don't be afraid to
serve the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon,
and it will be well with you. \bibleverse{10} As for me, behold, I will
dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who will come to us; but
you, gather wine and summer fruits and oil, and put them in your
vessels, and dwell in your cities that you have taken.'' \bibleverse{11}
Likewise when all the Jews who were in Moab, and among the children of
Ammon, and in Edom, and who were in all the countries, heard that the
king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over
them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, \bibleverse{12}
then all the Jews returned out of all places where they were driven, and
came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and gathered very
much wine and summer fruits.

\hypertarget{gedaliah-killed-by-ishmael}{%
\subsection{Gedaliah killed by
Ishmael}\label{gedaliah-killed-by-ishmael}}

\bibleverse{13} Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains
of the forces who were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
\bibleverse{14} and said to him, ``Do you know that Baalis the king of
the children of Ammon has sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to take your
life?'' But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam didn't believe them.
\bibleverse{15} Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to Gedaliah in
Mizpah secretly, saying, ``Please let me go, and I will kill Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah, and no man will know it. Why should he take your life,
that all the Jews who are gathered to you should be scattered, and the
remnant of Judah perish?'' \bibleverse{16} But Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam said to Johanan the son of Kareah, ``You shall not do this thing,
for you speak falsely of Ishmael.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-80}{%
\section{41}\label{section-80}}

\bibleverse{1} En el mes séptimo, Ismael hijo de Netanías, hijo de
Elisama, de la estirpe real y uno de los principales funcionarios del
rey, y diez hombres con él, vinieron a Gedalías hijo de Ajicam a Mizpa,
y allí comieron juntos el pan en Mizpa. \footnote{\textbf{41:1} Jer
  40,8; 2Re 25,25} \bibleverse{2} Entonces se levantó Ismael hijo de
Netanías, y los diez hombres que estaban con él, e hirieron con la
espada a Gedalías hijo de Ajicam, hijo de Safán, y lo mataron, a quien
el rey de Babilonia había nombrado gobernador del país. \footnote{\textbf{41:2}
  Jer 40,5} \bibleverse{3} Ismael también mató a todos los judíos que
estaban con Gedalías en Mizpa, y a los hombres de guerra caldeos que se
encontraban allí.

\hypertarget{ismael-asesina-a-los-peregrinos-del-templo-israelita-y-se-retira-de-mizpa-con-numerosos-prisioneros}{%
\subsection{Ismael asesina a los peregrinos del templo israelita y se
retira de Mizpa con numerosos
prisioneros}\label{ismael-asesina-a-los-peregrinos-del-templo-israelita-y-se-retira-de-mizpa-con-numerosos-prisioneros}}

\bibleverse{4} El segundo día después de haber matado a Gedalías, y sin
que nadie lo supiera, \bibleverse{5} vinieron hombres de Siquem, de Silo
y de Samaria, hasta ochenta hombres, con las barbas afeitadas y las
ropas rasgadas y cortadas, con ofrendas de harina e incienso en la mano,
para llevarlos a la casa de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{41:5} Lev 19,28}
\bibleverse{6} Ismael, hijo de Netanías, salió de Mizpa a recibirlos,
llorando a su paso, y al encontrarlos les dijo: ``Vengan a Gedalías,
hijo de Ajicam.'' \bibleverse{7} Cuando llegaron al centro de la ciudad,
Ismael, hijo de Netanías, los mató y los arrojó en medio del pozo, a él
y a los hombres que estaban con él. \bibleverse{8} Pero se encontraron
diez hombres entre los que dijeron a Ismael: ``No nos mates, porque
tenemos reservas escondidas en el campo, de trigo, de cebada, de aceite
y de miel.'' Así que se detuvo, y no los mató entre sus hermanos.
\bibleverse{9} Ahora bien, la fosa en la que Ismael arrojó todos los
cadáveres de los hombres que había matado, junto a Gedalías (ésta era la
que el rey Asa había hecho por temor a Baasa, rey de Israel), Ismael,
hijo de Netanías, la llenó con los muertos. \footnote{\textbf{41:9} 1Re
  15,16; 1Re 15,22}

\bibleverse{10} Entonces Ismael llevó cautivo a todo el pueblo que había
quedado en Mizpa, a las hijas del rey y a todo el pueblo que había
quedado en Mizpa, que Nabuzaradán, capitán de la guardia, había confiado
a Gedalías, hijo de Ajicam. Ismael, hijo de Netanías, los llevó
cautivos, y partió para pasar a los hijos de Amón.

\hypertarget{johanuxe1n-libera-a-los-juduxedos-capturados-por-ismael-en-gabauxf3n-y-se-embarca-para-emigrar-a-egipto}{%
\subsection{Johanán libera a los judíos capturados por Ismael en Gabaón
y se embarca para emigrar a
Egipto}\label{johanuxe1n-libera-a-los-juduxedos-capturados-por-ismael-en-gabauxf3n-y-se-embarca-para-emigrar-a-egipto}}

\bibleverse{11} Pero cuando Johanán hijo de Carea, y todos los capitanes
de las fuerzas que estaban con él, oyeron todo el mal que había hecho
Ismael hijo de Netanías, \bibleverse{12} entonces tomaron a todos los
hombres y fueron a pelear con Ismael hijo de Netanías, y lo encontraron
junto a las grandes aguas que están en Gabaón. \bibleverse{13} Cuando
todo el pueblo que estaba con Ismael vio a Johanán hijo de Carea y a
todos los capitanes de las fuerzas que estaban con él, se alegraron.
\bibleverse{14} Así que todo el pueblo que Ismael había llevado cautivo
desde Mizpa se dio la vuelta y regresó, y se fue con Johanán hijo de
Carea. \bibleverse{15} Pero Ismael hijo de Netanías escapó de Johanán
con ocho hombres, y se fue con los hijos de Amón.

\bibleverse{16} Entonces Johanán hijo de Carea y todos los capitanes de
las fuerzas que estaban con él tomaron todo el remanente del pueblo que
había recuperado de Ismael hijo de Netanías, desde Mizpa, después de
haber matado a Gedalías hijo de Ajicam: los hombres de guerra, con las
mujeres, los niños y los eunucos, que había traído de Gabaón.
\bibleverse{17} Partieron y vivieron en Geruth Chimham, que está junto a
Belén, para ir a entrar en Egipto \bibleverse{18} a causa de los
caldeos, pues tenían miedo de ellos, porque Ismael hijo de Netanías
había matado a Gedalías hijo de Ajicam, a quien el rey de Babilonia puso
como gobernador del país.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-81}{%
\section{41}\label{section-81}}

\bibleverse{1} Now in the seventh month, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,
the son of Elishama, of the royal offspring and one of the chief
officers of the king, and ten men with him, came to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they ate bread together in Mizpah.
\bibleverse{2} Then Ishmael the son of Nethaniah arose, and the ten men
who were with him, and struck Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan with the sword and killed him, whom the king of Babylon had made
governor over the land. \bibleverse{3} Ishmael also killed all the Jews
who were with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the Chaldean men of war who were
found there.

\hypertarget{ishmael-murders-the-israelite-temple-pilgrims-and-retreats-from-mizpah-with-numerous-prisoners}{%
\subsection{Ishmael murders the Israelite temple pilgrims and retreats
from Mizpah with numerous
prisoners}\label{ishmael-murders-the-israelite-temple-pilgrims-and-retreats-from-mizpah-with-numerous-prisoners}}

\bibleverse{4} The second day after he had killed Gedaliah, and no man
knew it, \bibleverse{5} men came from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from
Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaved and their clothes
torn, and having cut themselves, with meal offerings and frankincense in
their hand, to bring them to Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{6} Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah went out from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as
he went, and as he met them, he said to them, ``Come to Gedaliah the son
of Ahikam.'' \bibleverse{7} It was so, when they came into the middle of
the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah killed them, and cast them
into the middle of the pit, he, and the men who were with him.
\bibleverse{8} But ten men were found among those who said to Ishmael,
``Don't kill us; for we have stores hidden in the field, of wheat, and
of barley, and of oil, and of honey.'' So he stopped, and didn't kill
them among their brothers. \bibleverse{9} Now the pit in which Ishmael
cast all the dead bodies of the men whom he had killed, by the side of
Gedaliah (this was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha
king of Israel), Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with those who
were killed. \bibleverse{10} Then Ishmael carried away captive all of
the people who were left in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all
the people who remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the
children of Ammon.

\hypertarget{johanan-frees-the-jews-captured-by-ishmael-at-gibeon-and-embarks-to-emigrate-to-egypt}{%
\subsection{Johanan frees the Jews captured by Ishmael at Gibeon and
embarks to emigrate to
Egypt}\label{johanan-frees-the-jews-captured-by-ishmael-at-gibeon-and-embarks-to-emigrate-to-egypt}}

\bibleverse{11} But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains
of the forces who were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah had done, \bibleverse{12} then they took all the men,
and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by
the great waters that are in Gibeon. \bibleverse{13} Now when all the
people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces who were with him, then they were glad.
\bibleverse{14} So all the people who Ishmael had carried away captive
from Mizpah turned about and came back, and went to Johanan the son of
Kareah. \bibleverse{15} But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from
Johanan with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon.
\bibleverse{16} Then Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of
the forces who were with him took all the remnant of the people whom he
had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after he
had killed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam---the men of war, with the women,
the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Gibeon.
\bibleverse{17} They departed and lived in Geruth Chimham, which is by
Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt \bibleverse{18} because of the
Chaldeans; for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah had killed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of
Babylon made governor over the land.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-preguntuxf3-a-dios-en-nombre-de-sus-conciudadanos-sobre-la-emigraciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Jeremías preguntó a Dios en nombre de sus conciudadanos
sobre la
emigración}\label{jeremuxedas-preguntuxf3-a-dios-en-nombre-de-sus-conciudadanos-sobre-la-emigraciuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-82}{%
\section{42}\label{section-82}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces se acercaron todos los capitanes de las fuerzas,
y Johanán hijo de Carea, y Jezanías hijo de Oseas, y todo el pueblo,
desde el más pequeño hasta el más grande, \bibleverse{2} y dijeron al
profeta Jeremías: ``Te ruego que nuestra súplica sea presentada ante ti
y ruega por nosotros a Yahvé tu Dios, incluso por todo este remanente,
pues no quedamos más que unos pocos de entre muchos, tal como nos ven
tus ojos, \footnote{\textbf{42:2} Jer 37,3} \bibleverse{3} para que
Yahvé tu Dios nos muestre el camino por el que debemos andar, y las
cosas que debemos hacer.''

\bibleverse{4} El profeta Jeremías les dijo: ``Os he oído. He aquí que
voy a orar a Yavé, vuestro Dios, según vuestras palabras; y sucederá que
cualquier cosa que Yavé os responda, os la declararé. No os ocultaré
nada''.

\bibleverse{5} Entonces dijeron a Jeremías: ``Que Yahvé sea testigo fiel
y verdadero entre nosotros, si no hacemos conforme a toda la palabra con
que Yahvé tu Dios te envía a decirnos. \bibleverse{6} Sea buena o sea
mala, obedeceremos la voz de Yahvé nuestro Dios, a quien te enviamos,
para que nos vaya bien cuando obedezcamos la voz de Yahvé nuestro
Dios.''

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-advierte-contra-la-emigraciuxf3n-en-nombre-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Jeremías advierte contra la emigración en nombre de
Dios}\label{jeremuxedas-advierte-contra-la-emigraciuxf3n-en-nombre-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{7} Al cabo de diez días, la palabra de Yahvé llegó a
Jeremías. \bibleverse{8} Entonces llamó a Johanán, hijo de Carea, y a
todos los capitanes de las fuerzas que estaban con él, y a todo el
pueblo, desde el más pequeño hasta el más grande, \bibleverse{9} y les
dijo: ``Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, a quien me enviaste para que
presentara tu súplica ante él, dice: \bibleverse{10} `Si sigues viviendo
en esta tierra, yo te edificaré, y no te derribaré, y te plantaré, y no
te arrancaré; porque me aflige la angustia que he traído sobre ti.
\bibleverse{11} No tengas miedo del rey de Babilonia, de quien tienes
miedo. No le tengas miedo --- dice el Señor ---, porque yo estoy contigo
para salvarte y librarte de su mano. \bibleverse{12} Yo te concederé
misericordia, para que él se apiade de ti y te haga volver a tu tierra.

\bibleverse{13} ``\,`Pero si decís: ``No moraremos en esta tierra,'' de
modo que no obedecéis la voz de Yahvé vuestro Dios, \bibleverse{14}
diciendo: ``No, sino que iremos a la tierra de Egipto, donde no veremos
guerra, ni oiremos el sonido de la trompeta, ni tendremos hambre de pan;
y allí moraremos;''\,' \bibleverse{15} ahora, pues, escuchad la palabra
de Yahvé, oh remanente de Judá. Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de
Israel, dice: `Si en verdad fijáis vuestros rostros para entrar en
Egipto, y vais a vivir allí, \bibleverse{16} entonces sucederá que la
espada, a la que teméis, os alcanzará allí en la tierra de Egipto; y el
hambre, de la que tenéis miedo, os seguirá de cerca allí en Egipto; y
moriréis allí. \bibleverse{17} Así sucederá con todos los hombres que se
propongan ir a Egipto para vivir allí. Morirán por la espada, por el
hambre y por la peste. Ninguno de ellos permanecerá ni escapará del mal
que les traeré''. \footnote{\textbf{42:17} Jer 29,17-18}

\hypertarget{jeremuxedas-repite-la-amenaza-divina}{%
\subsection{Jeremías repite la amenaza
divina}\label{jeremuxedas-repite-la-amenaza-divina}}

\bibleverse{18} Porque Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
`Como mi ira y mi furia se han derramado sobre los habitantes de
Jerusalén, así se derramará mi ira sobre ustedes, cuando entren en
Egipto; y serán objeto de horror, de asombro, de maldición y de oprobio;
y no verán más este lugar.'

\bibleverse{19} ``El Señor ha hablado de ustedes, remanente de Judá:
``¡No vayan a Egipto! Sabed ciertamente que hoy os he dado testimonio.
\bibleverse{20} Porque habéis actuado con engaño contra vuestras propias
almas; pues me enviasteis a Yahvé vuestro Dios, diciendo: `Ruega por
nosotros a Yahvé nuestro Dios; y según todo lo que diga Yahvé nuestro
Dios, decláranoslo, y lo haremos.' \footnote{\textbf{42:20} Jer 42,5}
\bibleverse{21} Hoy os lo he declarado; pero no habéis obedecido la voz
de Yahvé vuestro Dios en nada de lo que me ha enviado a vosotros.
\bibleverse{22} Ahora, pues, sabed ciertamente que moriréis a espada, de
hambre y de peste en el lugar donde queráis ir a vivir.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiah-asked-god-on-behalf-of-his-fellow-citizens-about-emigration}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah asked God on behalf of his fellow citizens about
emigration}\label{jeremiah-asked-god-on-behalf-of-his-fellow-citizens-about-emigration}}

\hypertarget{section-83}{%
\section{42}\label{section-83}}

\bibleverse{1} Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son
of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the
least even to the greatest, came near, \bibleverse{2} and said to
Jeremiah the prophet, ``Please let our supplication be presented before
you, and pray for us to Yahweh your God, even for all this remnant, for
we are left but a few of many, as your eyes see us, \bibleverse{3} that
Yahweh your God may show us the way in which we should walk, and the
things that we should do.'' \bibleverse{4} Then Jeremiah the prophet
said to them, ``I have heard you. Behold, I will pray to Yahweh your God
according to your words; and it will happen that whatever thing Yahweh
answers you, I will declare it to you. I will keep nothing back from
you.'' \bibleverse{5} Then they said to Jeremiah, ``May Yahweh be a true
and faithful witness among us, if we don't do according to all the word
with which Yahweh your God sends you to tell us. \bibleverse{6} Whether
it is good, or whether it is bad, we will obey the voice of Yahweh our
God, to whom we send you; that it may be well with us, when we obey the
voice of Yahweh our God.''

\hypertarget{jeremiah-warns-against-emigration-in-the-name-of-god}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah warns against emigration in the name of
God}\label{jeremiah-warns-against-emigration-in-the-name-of-god}}

\bibleverse{7} After ten days, Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah.
\bibleverse{8} Then he called Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces who were with him, and all the people from the
least even to the greatest, \bibleverse{9} and said to them, ``Yahweh,
the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to present your supplication
before him, says: \bibleverse{10} `If you will still live in this land,
then I will build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and
not pluck you up; for I grieve over the distress that I have brought on
you. \bibleverse{11} Don't be afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom you
are afraid. Don't be afraid of him,' says Yahweh, `for I am with you to
save you, and to deliver you from his hand. \bibleverse{12} I will grant
you mercy, that he may have mercy on you, and cause you to return to
your own land. \bibleverse{13} ``\,`But if you say, ``We will not dwell
in this land,'' so that you don't obey Yahweh your God's voice,
\bibleverse{14} saying, ``No, but we will go into the land of Egypt,
where we will see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have
hunger of bread; and there we will dwell;''\,' \bibleverse{15} now
therefore hear Yahweh's word, O remnant of Judah! Yahweh of Armies, the
God of Israel, says, `If you indeed set your faces to enter into Egypt,
and go to live there, \bibleverse{16} then it will happen that the
sword, which you fear, will overtake you there in the land of Egypt; and
the famine, about which you are afraid, will follow close behind you
there in Egypt; and you will die there. \bibleverse{17} So will it be
with all the men who set their faces to go into Egypt to live there.
They will die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence. None
of them will remain or escape from the evil that I will bring on them.'

\hypertarget{jeremiah-repeats-the-divine-threat}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah repeats the divine
threat}\label{jeremiah-repeats-the-divine-threat}}

\bibleverse{18} For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `As my
anger and my wrath has been poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
so my wrath will be poured out on you, when you enter into Egypt; and
you will be an object of horror, an astonishment, a curse, and a
reproach; and you will see this place no more.' \bibleverse{19} ``Yahweh
has spoken concerning you, remnant of Judah, `Don't go into Egypt!' Know
certainly that I have testified to you today. \bibleverse{20} For you
have dealt deceitfully against your own souls; for you sent me to Yahweh
your God, saying, `Pray for us to Yahweh our God; and according to all
that Yahweh our God says, so declare to us, and we will do it.'
\bibleverse{21} I have declared it to you today; but you have not obeyed
Yahweh your God's voice in anything for which he has sent me to you.
\bibleverse{22} Now therefore know certainly that you will die by the
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence in the place where you
desire to go to live.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{desobediencia-de-los-advertidos-jeremuxedas-y-baruc-son-llevados-contra-su-voluntad-a-egipto}{%
\subsection{Desobediencia de los advertidos; Jeremías y Baruc son
llevados contra su voluntad a
Egipto}\label{desobediencia-de-los-advertidos-jeremuxedas-y-baruc-son-llevados-contra-su-voluntad-a-egipto}}

\hypertarget{section-84}{%
\section{43}\label{section-84}}

\bibleverse{1} Cuando Jeremías terminó de decir a todo el pueblo todas
las palabras de Yavé, su Dios, con las que Yavé, su Dios, le había
enviado a ellos, todas estas palabras, \bibleverse{2} entonces hablaron
Azarías, hijo de Oseías, Johanán, hijo de Carea, y todos los soberbios,
diciendo a Jeremías: ``Hablas en falso. El Señor, nuestro Dios, no te ha
enviado a decir: `No irás a Egipto para vivir allí'; \bibleverse{3} sino
que Baruc, hijo de Nerías, te ha puesto en contra de nosotros para
entregarnos en manos de los caldeos, para que nos den muerte o nos
lleven cautivos a Babilonia.''

\bibleverse{4} Así que Johanán hijo de Carea, y todos los capitanes de
las fuerzas, y todo el pueblo, no obedecieron la voz de Yahvé, para
habitar en la tierra de Judá. \bibleverse{5} Pero Johanán hijo de Carea
y todos los capitanes de las fuerzas tomaron a todo el remanente de
Judá, que había regresado de todas las naciones a las que habían sido
expulsados, para vivir en la tierra de Judá: \bibleverse{6} los hombres,
las mujeres, los niños, las hijas del rey y toda persona que
Nabuzaradán, el capitán de la guardia, había dejado con Gedalías hijo de
Ajicam, hijo de Safán, y el profeta Jeremías, y Baruc hijo de Nerías.
\bibleverse{7} Entraron en la tierra de Egipto, porque no obedecieron la
voz de Yahvé; y llegaron a Tahpanhes. \footnote{\textbf{43:7} 2Re 25,26}

\hypertarget{en-thachpanches-jeremuxedas-anuncia-la-inminente-sumisiuxf3n-de-egipto-por-nabucodonosor}{%
\subsection{En Thachpanches, Jeremías anuncia la inminente sumisión de
Egipto por
Nabucodonosor}\label{en-thachpanches-jeremuxedas-anuncia-la-inminente-sumisiuxf3n-de-egipto-por-nabucodonosor}}

\bibleverse{8} Entonces vino la palabra de Yavé a Jeremías en Tahpanhes,
diciendo: \bibleverse{9} ``Toma en tu mano grandes piedras y escóndelas
con argamasa en la obra de ladrillo que está a la entrada de la casa del
faraón en Tahpanhes, a la vista de los hombres de Judá. \bibleverse{10}
Diles que el Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, ha dicho: `He
aquí que yo envío y tomo a Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, mi siervo, y
colocará su trono sobre estas piedras que he escondido, y extenderá
sobre ellas su pabellón real. \footnote{\textbf{43:10} Jer 25,9}
\bibleverse{11} Vendrá y golpeará la tierra de Egipto; los que están
para la muerte serán muertos, y los que están para el cautiverio para el
cautiverio, y los que están para la espada para la espada. \footnote{\textbf{43:11}
  Jer 15,2} \bibleverse{12} Encenderé el fuego en las casas de los
dioses de Egipto. Los quemará y los llevará cautivos. Se vestirá con la
tierra de Egipto, como se viste un pastor, y saldrá de allí en paz.
\footnote{\textbf{43:12} Jer 46,25} \bibleverse{13} También romperá las
columnas de Bet Shemesh que está en la tierra de Egipto; y quemará con
fuego las casas de los dioses de Egipto.'\,''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{disobedience-of-those-warned-jeremiah-and-baruch-are-taken-against-their-will-to-egypt}{%
\subsection{Disobedience of those warned; Jeremiah and Baruch are taken
against their will to
Egypt}\label{disobedience-of-those-warned-jeremiah-and-baruch-are-taken-against-their-will-to-egypt}}

\hypertarget{section-85}{%
\section{43}\label{section-85}}

\bibleverse{1} When Jeremiah had finished speaking to all the people all
the words of Yahweh their God, with which Yahweh their God had sent him
to them, even all these words, \bibleverse{2} then Azariah the son of
Hoshaiah, Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men spoke, saying
to Jeremiah, ``You speak falsely. Yahweh our God has not sent you to
say, `You shall not go into Egypt to live there;' \bibleverse{3} but
Baruch the son of Neriah has turned you against us, to deliver us into
the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may put us to death or carry us
away captive to Babylon.'' \bibleverse{4} So Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, didn't obey
Yahweh's voice, to dwell in the land of Judah. \bibleverse{5} But
Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the forces took all
the remnant of Judah, who had returned from all the nations where they
had been driven, to live in the land of Judah--- \bibleverse{6} the men,
the women, the children, the king's daughters, and every person who
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, the son of Shaphan; and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son
of Neriah. \bibleverse{7} They came into the land of Egypt, for they
didn't obey Yahweh's voice; and they came to Tahpanhes.

\hypertarget{in-thachpanches-jeremiah-announces-the-imminent-submission-of-egypt-by-nebuchadnezzar}{%
\subsection{In Thachpanches, Jeremiah announces the imminent submission
of Egypt by
Nebuchadnezzar}\label{in-thachpanches-jeremiah-announces-the-imminent-submission-of-egypt-by-nebuchadnezzar}}

\bibleverse{8} Then Yahweh's word came to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,
\bibleverse{9} ``Take great stones in your hand and hide them in mortar
in the brick work which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes,
in the sight of the men of Judah. \bibleverse{10} Tell them, Yahweh of
Armies, the God of Israel, says: `Behold, I will send and take
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne
on these stones that I have hidden; and he will spread his royal
pavilion over them. \bibleverse{11} He will come, and will strike the
land of Egypt; such as are for death will be put to death, and such as
are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to the
sword. \bibleverse{12} I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of
Egypt. He will burn them, and carry them away captive. He will array
himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd puts on his garment; and
he will go out from there in peace. \bibleverse{13} He will also break
the pillars of Beth Shemesh that is in the land of Egypt; and he will
burn the houses of the gods of Egypt with fire.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-discurso-amenazador-de-jeremuxedas-contra-la-idolatruxeda-de-los-juduxedos}{%
\subsection{El discurso amenazador de Jeremías contra la idolatría de
los
judíos}\label{el-discurso-amenazador-de-jeremuxedas-contra-la-idolatruxeda-de-los-juduxedos}}

\hypertarget{section-86}{%
\section{44}\label{section-86}}

\bibleverse{1} La palabra que vino a Jeremías acerca de todos los judíos
que vivían en la tierra de Egipto, que vivían en Migdol, en Tahpanhes,
en Menfis y en el país de Patros, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{44:1} Jer
  43,7} \bibleverse{2} ``Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel,
dice: `Habéis visto todo el mal que he traído sobre Jerusalén y sobre
todas las ciudades de Judá. He aquí que hoy son una desolación, y nadie
habita en ellas, \bibleverse{3} a causa de su maldad que han cometido
para provocarme a la ira, pues fueron a quemar incienso para servir a
otros dioses que no conocían, ni ellos, ni ustedes, ni sus padres.
\bibleverse{4} Sin embargo, les envié a todos mis siervos los profetas,
madrugando y enviándolos, diciendo: ``No hagan esta cosa abominable que
yo aborrezco''. \bibleverse{5} Pero no escucharon ni inclinaron su oído.
No se convirtieron de su maldad, para dejar de quemar incienso a otros
dioses. \bibleverse{6} Por eso se derramó mi ira y mi enojo, y se
encendió en las ciudades de Judá y en las calles de Jerusalén; y
quedaron asoladas y desoladas, como hoy.'

\bibleverse{7} ``Por tanto, ahora Yahvé, el Dios de los Ejércitos, el
Dios de Israel, dice: `¿Por qué cometéis un gran mal contra vuestras
propias almas, al cortar de vosotros a hombres y mujeres, a niños y a
lactantes de en medio de Judá, para no dejaros a nadie, \bibleverse{8}
ya que me provocáis a la ira con las obras de vuestras manos, quemando
incienso a otros dioses en la tierra de Egipto donde habéis ido a vivir,
para que seáis cortados, y para que seáis una maldición y un oprobio
entre todas las naciones de la tierra? \bibleverse{9} ¿Acaso te has
olvidado de la maldad de tus padres, de la maldad de los reyes de Judá,
de la maldad de sus esposas, de tu propia maldad y de la maldad de tus
esposas que cometieron en la tierra de Judá y en las calles de
Jerusalén? \bibleverse{10} No se han humillado hasta el día de hoy, ni
han temido, ni han caminado en mi ley, ni en mis estatutos, que yo puse
delante de vosotros y delante de vuestros padres'.

\bibleverse{11} ``Por eso el Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel,
dice: `He aquí que yo pongo mi rostro contra ti para mal, hasta cortar a
todo Judá. \bibleverse{12} Tomaré al resto de Judá que ha puesto su
rostro para ir a la tierra de Egipto a vivir allí, y todos ellos serán
consumidos. Caerán en la tierra de Egipto. Serán consumidos por la
espada y por el hambre. Morirán, desde el más pequeño hasta el más
grande, por la espada y el hambre. Serán objeto de horror, de asombro,
de maldición y de reproche. \footnote{\textbf{44:12} Jer 29,17-18}
\bibleverse{13} Porque castigaré a los que habitan en la tierra de
Egipto, como he castigado a Jerusalén, con la espada, con el hambre y
con la peste; \bibleverse{14} de modo que ninguno de los restos de Judá,
que se han ido a la tierra de Egipto para vivir allí, escapará ni
quedará para volver a la tierra de Judá, a la que tienen el deseo de
volver para habitarla; porque nadie volverá sino los que escapen.'\,''

\hypertarget{la-comunidad-especialmente-las-mujeres-declaran-abiertamente-que-quieren-servir-a-la-reina-del-cielo}{%
\subsection{La comunidad, especialmente las mujeres, declaran
abiertamente que quieren servir a la Reina del
Cielo}\label{la-comunidad-especialmente-las-mujeres-declaran-abiertamente-que-quieren-servir-a-la-reina-del-cielo}}

\bibleverse{15} Entonces todos los hombres que sabían que sus esposas
quemaban incienso a otros dioses, y todas las mujeres que estaban a su
lado, una gran asamblea, todo el pueblo que vivía en la tierra de
Egipto, en Patros, respondieron a Jeremías, diciendo: \footnote{\textbf{44:15}
  Is 11,11} \bibleverse{16} ``En cuanto a la palabra que nos has hablado
en nombre de Yavé, no te escucharemos. \bibleverse{17} Pero sí
cumpliremos toda la palabra que ha salido de nuestra boca, para quemar
incienso a la reina del cielo y derramar libaciones para ella, como lo
hemos hecho nosotros y nuestros padres, nuestros reyes y nuestros
príncipes, en las ciudades de Judá y en las calles de Jerusalén; porque
entonces teníamos abundancia de alimentos y estábamos bien, y no veíamos
ningún mal. \footnote{\textbf{44:17} Jer 7,17-18; Os 2,5}
\bibleverse{18} Pero desde que dejamos de quemar incienso a la reina del
cielo y de derramar libaciones para ella, nos ha faltado todo y hemos
sido consumidos por la espada y el hambre.''

\bibleverse{19} Las mujeres dijeron: ``Cuando quemamos incienso a la
reina del cielo y le derramamos libaciones, ¿hicimos sus pasteles para
adorarla y le derramamos libaciones sin nuestros maridos?''

\hypertarget{el-rechazo-de-jeremuxedas-a-sus-excusas-y-su-alejamiento-de-ellos}{%
\subsection{El rechazo de Jeremías a sus excusas y su alejamiento de
ellos}\label{el-rechazo-de-jeremuxedas-a-sus-excusas-y-su-alejamiento-de-ellos}}

\bibleverse{20} Entonces Jeremías dijo a todo el pueblo, a los hombres y
a las mujeres, a todo el pueblo que le había respondido, diciendo:
\bibleverse{21} ``El incienso que quemaron en las ciudades de Judá y en
las calles de Jerusalén, ustedes y sus padres, sus reyes y sus
príncipes, y el pueblo del país, ¿no se acordó Yahvé de ellos, y no le
vino a la mente? \bibleverse{22} Así, Yahvé no pudo soportarlo más, a
causa de la maldad de tus obras y de las abominaciones que has cometido.
Por eso tu tierra se ha convertido en una desolación, en un asombro y en
una maldición, sin habitantes, como lo es hoy. \bibleverse{23} Porque
habéis quemado incienso y porque habéis pecado contra Yahvé, y no habéis
obedecido la voz de Yahvé, ni habéis caminado en su ley, ni en sus
estatutos, ni en sus testimonios; por eso os ha sucedido este mal, como
sucede hoy.''

\bibleverse{24} Además, Jeremías dijo a todo el pueblo, incluidas todas
las mujeres: ``¡Oíd la palabra de Yahvé, todo Judá que está en la tierra
de Egipto! \bibleverse{25} Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel,
dice: `Vosotros y vuestras mujeres habéis hablado con la boca, y con las
manos lo habéis cumplido, diciendo: ``Ciertamente cumpliremos nuestros
votos que hemos prometido, para quemar incienso a la reina del cielo y
derramar libaciones para ella.'' ``\,`Establece entonces tus votos, y
cumple tus votos'. \footnote{\textbf{44:25} Jer 44,17}

\hypertarget{la-uxfaltima-profecuxeda-de-la-desgracia-de-jeremuxedas-sobre-la-comunidad-egipcia}{%
\subsection{La última profecía de la desgracia de Jeremías sobre la
comunidad
egipcia}\label{la-uxfaltima-profecuxeda-de-la-desgracia-de-jeremuxedas-sobre-la-comunidad-egipcia}}

\bibleverse{26} ``Oíd, pues, la palabra de Yavé, todos los de Judá que
habitan en la tierra de Egipto: ``He aquí que he jurado por mi gran
nombre --- dice Yavé --- que mi nombre no será más nombrado en boca de
ningún hombre de Judá en toda la tierra de Egipto, diciendo: ``Vive
Yavé.'' \bibleverse{27} He aquí que yo los vigilo para mal y no para
bien; y todos los hombres de Judá que están en la tierra de Egipto serán
consumidos por la espada y por el hambre, hasta que todos desaparezcan.
\bibleverse{28} Los que escapen de la espada volverán de la tierra de
Egipto a la tierra de Judá en número reducido. Todo el remanente de
Judá, que ha ido a la tierra de Egipto a vivir allí, sabrá de quién será
la palabra, si mía o de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{44:28} Is 11,11}

\bibleverse{29} ``\,`Esta será la señal para ti', dice Yahvé, `de que te
castigaré en este lugar, para que sepas que mis palabras se mantendrán
ciertamente contra ti para mal.' \bibleverse{30} Dice Yahvé: `He aquí
que yo entregaré al faraón Hofra, rey de Egipto, en manos de sus
enemigos y en manos de los que buscan su vida, así como entregué a
Sedequías, rey de Judá, en manos de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, que
era su enemigo y buscaba su vida.'\,'' \footnote{\textbf{44:30} 2Cró
  36,13; 2Cró 36,20}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-threatening-speech-against-the-idolatry-of-the-jews}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's threatening speech against the idolatry of the
Jews}\label{jeremiahs-threatening-speech-against-the-idolatry-of-the-jews}}

\hypertarget{section-87}{%
\section{44}\label{section-87}}

\bibleverse{1} The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews
who lived in the land of Egypt, who lived at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes,
and at Memphis, and in the country of Pathros, saying, \bibleverse{2}
``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: `You have seen all the evil
that I have brought on Jerusalem, and on all the cities of Judah.
Behold, today they are a desolation, and no man dwells in them,
\bibleverse{3} because of their wickedness which they have committed to
provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, to serve other
gods that they didn't know, neither they, nor you, nor your fathers.
\bibleverse{4} However I sent to you all my servants the prophets,
rising up early and sending them, saying, ``Oh, don't do this abominable
thing that I hate.'' \bibleverse{5} But they didn't listen and didn't
incline their ear. They didn't turn from their wickedness, to stop
burning incense to other gods. \bibleverse{6} Therefore my wrath and my
anger was poured out, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as it is today.'
\bibleverse{7} ``Therefore now Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of
Israel, says: `Why do you commit great evil against your own souls, to
cut off from yourselves man and woman, infant and nursing child out of
the middle of Judah, to leave yourselves no one remaining,
\bibleverse{8} in that you provoke me to anger with the works of your
hands, burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have
gone to live, that you may be cut off, and that you may be a curse and a
reproach among all the nations of the earth? \bibleverse{9} Have you
forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, the wickedness of the kings of
Judah, the wickedness of their wives, your own wickedness, and the
wickedness of your wives which they committed in the land of Judah and
in the streets of Jerusalem? \bibleverse{10} They are not humbled even
to this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my
statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.'
\bibleverse{11} ``Therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says:
`Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, even to cut off all
Judah. \bibleverse{12} I will take the remnant of Judah that have set
their faces to go into the land of Egypt to live there, and they will
all be consumed. They will fall in the land of Egypt. They will be
consumed by the sword and by the famine. They will die, from the least
even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine. They will be an
object of horror, an astonishment, a curse, and a reproach.
\bibleverse{13} For I will punish those who dwell in the land of Egypt,
as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence; \bibleverse{14} so that none of the remnant of Judah, who
have gone into the land of Egypt to live there, will escape or be left
to return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return
to dwell there; for no one will return except those who will
escape.'\,''

\hypertarget{the-community-especially-the-women-openly-declare-that-they-want-to-serve-the-queen-of-heaven}{%
\subsection{The community, especially the women, openly declare that
they want to serve the Queen of
Heaven}\label{the-community-especially-the-women-openly-declare-that-they-want-to-serve-the-queen-of-heaven}}

\bibleverse{15} Then all the men who knew that their wives burned
incense to other gods, and all the women who stood by, a great assembly,
even all the people who lived in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered
Jeremiah, saying, \bibleverse{16} ``As for the word that you have spoken
to us in Yahweh's name, we will not listen to you. \bibleverse{17} But
we will certainly perform every word that has gone out of our mouth, to
burn incense to the queen of the sky and to pour out drink offerings to
her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in
the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; for then we had
plenty of food, and were well, and saw no evil. \bibleverse{18} But
since we stopped burning incense to the queen of the sky, and pouring
out drink offerings to her, we have lacked all things, and have been
consumed by the sword and by the famine.'' \bibleverse{19} The women
said, ``When we burned incense to the queen of the sky and poured out
drink offerings to her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour
out drink offerings to her, without our husbands?''

\hypertarget{jeremiahs-rejection-of-their-excuses-and-his-turning-away-from-them}{%
\subsection{Jeremiah's rejection of their excuses and his turning away
from
them}\label{jeremiahs-rejection-of-their-excuses-and-his-turning-away-from-them}}

\bibleverse{20} Then Jeremiah said to all the people---to the men and to
the women, even to all the people who had given him an answer, saying,
\bibleverse{21} ``The incense that you burned in the cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers, your kings and
your princes, and the people of the land, didn't Yahweh remember them,
and didn't it come into his mind? \bibleverse{22} Thus Yahweh could no
longer bear it, because of the evil of your doings and because of the
abominations which you have committed. Therefore your land has become a
desolation, an astonishment, and a curse, without inhabitant, as it is
today. \bibleverse{23} Because you have burned incense and because you
have sinned against Yahweh, and have not obeyed Yahweh's voice, nor
walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies;
therefore this evil has happened to you, as it is today.''
\bibleverse{24} Moreover Jeremiah said to all the people, including all
the women, ``Hear Yahweh's word, all Judah who are in the land of Egypt!
\bibleverse{25} Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, `You and your
wives have both spoken with your mouths, and with your hands have
fulfilled it, saying, ``We will surely perform our vows that we have
vowed, to burn incense to the queen of the sky, and to pour out drink
offerings to her.'' ``\,`Establish then your vows, and perform your
vows.'

\hypertarget{the-last-prophecy-of-jeremiahs-doom-on-the-egyptian-community}{%
\subsection{The last prophecy of Jeremiah's doom on the Egyptian
community}\label{the-last-prophecy-of-jeremiahs-doom-on-the-egyptian-community}}

\bibleverse{26} ``Therefore hear Yahweh's word, all Judah who dwell in
the land of Egypt: `Behold, I have sworn by my great name,' says Yahweh,
`that my name will no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in
all the land of Egypt, saying, ``As the Lord Yahweh lives.''
\bibleverse{27} Behold, I watch over them for evil, and not for good;
and all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt will be consumed
by the sword and by the famine, until they are all gone. \bibleverse{28}
Those who escape the sword will return out of the land of Egypt into the
land of Judah few in number. All the remnant of Judah, who have gone
into the land of Egypt to live there, will know whose word will stand,
mine or theirs. \bibleverse{29} ``\,`This will be the sign to you,' says
Yahweh, `that I will punish you in this place, that you may know that my
words will surely stand against you for evil.' \bibleverse{30} Yahweh
says, `Behold, I will give Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of
his enemies and into the hand of those who seek his life, just as I gave
Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,
who was his enemy and sought his life.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{palabras-de-advertencia-y-consuelo-de-jeremuxedas-a-baruc}{%
\subsection{Palabras de advertencia y consuelo de Jeremías a
Baruc}\label{palabras-de-advertencia-y-consuelo-de-jeremuxedas-a-baruc}}

\hypertarget{section-88}{%
\section{45}\label{section-88}}

\bibleverse{1} El mensaje que el profeta Jeremías dirigió a Baruc, hijo
de Nerías, cuando escribió estas palabras en un libro por boca de
Jeremías, en el cuarto año de Joacim, hijo de Josías, rey de Judá,
diciendo: \bibleverse{2} ``Yahvé, el Dios de Israel, te dice, Baruc:
\footnote{\textbf{45:2} Jer 36,4} \bibleverse{3} `Has dicho: ¡Ay de mí
ahora! ¡Porque Yahvé ha añadido tristeza a mi dolor! Estoy cansado de
mis gemidos y no encuentro descanso''.

\bibleverse{4} ``Le dirás: Yahvé dice: `He aquí que lo que he
construido, lo derribaré, y lo que he plantado, lo arrancaré; y esto en
toda la tierra. \bibleverse{5} ¿Buscas grandes cosas para ti? No las
busques; porque he aquí que yo traeré el mal sobre toda carne --- dice
Yahvé ---, pero te dejaré escapar con tu vida dondequiera que vayas.''
\footnote{\textbf{45:5} Jer 39,18; Jer 43,6}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-89}{%
\section{45}\label{section-89}}

\bibleverse{1} The message that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Baruch the
son of Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book at the mouth of
Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of
Judah, saying, \bibleverse{2} ``Yahweh, the God of Israel, says to you,
Baruch: \bibleverse{3} `You said, ``Woe is me now! For Yahweh has added
sorrow to my pain! I am weary with my groaning, and I find no rest.''\,'
\bibleverse{4} ``You shall tell him, Yahweh says: `Behold, that which I
have built, I will break down, and that which I have planted I will
pluck up; and this in the whole land. \bibleverse{5} Do you seek great
things for yourself? Don't seek them; for, behold, I will bring evil on
all flesh,' says Yahweh, `but I will let you escape with your life
wherever you go.'\,''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{profecuxedas-contra-pueblos-extranjeros-paganos}{%
\subsection{Profecías contra pueblos extranjeros
(paganos)}\label{profecuxedas-contra-pueblos-extranjeros-paganos}}

\hypertarget{section-90}{%
\section{46}\label{section-90}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra de Yahvé que vino al profeta Jeremías sobre las
naciones.

\hypertarget{la-marcha-orgullosa-de-los-egipcios-su-derrota-en-carchemisch}{%
\subsection{La marcha orgullosa de los egipcios; su derrota en
Carchemisch}\label{la-marcha-orgullosa-de-los-egipcios-su-derrota-en-carchemisch}}

\bibleverse{2} De Egipto: sobre el ejército del faraón Necoh, rey de
Egipto, que estaba junto al río Éufrates, en Carquemis, que
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, atacó en el cuarto año de Joacim, hijo
de Josías, rey de Judá. \footnote{\textbf{46:2} Is 19,1; Ezeq 29,1; Ezeq
  30,1-30; 2Cró 35,20} \bibleverse{3} ``Prepara el broquel y el escudo,
¡y acércate a la batalla! \bibleverse{4} Enjaezad los caballos y
levantaos, jinetes, y se pongan de pie con sus cascos. Pulir las lanzas,
poner los abrigos de correo. \bibleverse{5} ¿Por qué lo he visto? Están
consternados y se vuelven hacia atrás. Sus poderosos son derrotados, han
huido a toda prisa, y no mires atrás. El terror está en todos los
lados''. dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{6} ``No dejes que el veloz huya, ni el
hombre poderoso escapará. En el norte, junto al río Éufrateshan
tropezado y han caído. \bibleverse{7} ``¿Quién es ese que sube como el
Nilo, como los ríos cuyas aguas crecen? \bibleverse{8} Egipto sube como
el Nilo, como los ríos cuyas aguas crecen. Dice: ``Me levantaré. Cubriré
la tierra. Destruiré las ciudades y sus habitantes'. \bibleverse{9}
¡Subid, caballos! ¡Fuerza, carros! Que salgan los poderosos: Cush y Put,
que manejan el escudo; y el Ludim, que maneja y dobla el arco.
\bibleverse{10} Porque ese día es del Señor, Yahvé de los Ejércitos, un
día de venganza, para poder vengarse de sus adversarios. La espada
devorará y se saciará, y beberá hasta saciarse de su sangre; porque el
Señor, Yahvé de los Ejércitos, tiene un sacrificio en el país del norte,
junto al río Éufrates. \footnote{\textbf{46:10} Deut 32,42; Is 34,5}
\bibleverse{11} Sube a Galaad y toma bálsamo, virgen hija de Egipto.
Usas muchas medicinas en vano. No hay curación para ti. \footnote{\textbf{46:11}
  Jer 8,22} \bibleverse{12} Las naciones han oído hablar de tu
vergüenza, y la tierra está llena de tu grito; porque el poderoso ha
tropezado con el poderoso, caen los dos juntos''.

\hypertarget{grave-angustia-de-guerra-en-egipto-como-resultado-de-la-conquista-de-nabucodonosor-palabras-de-consuelo-a-israel}{%
\subsection{Grave angustia de guerra en Egipto como resultado de la
conquista de Nabucodonosor; Palabras de consuelo a
Israel}\label{grave-angustia-de-guerra-en-egipto-como-resultado-de-la-conquista-de-nabucodonosor-palabras-de-consuelo-a-israel}}

\bibleverse{13} La palabra que Yahvé habló al profeta Jeremías, de que
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, vendría a golpear la tierra de Egipto:
\bibleverse{14} ``Declara en Egipto, publicar en Migdol, y publicar en
Memphis y en Tahpanhes; dicen: ``Levántate y prepárate'', porque la
espada ha devorado a tu alrededor'. \bibleverse{15} ¿Por qué son
arrastrados tus fuertes? No se pusieron de pie, porque Yahvé los empujó.
\bibleverse{16} Hizo tropezar a muchos. Sí, cayeron uno sobre otro.
Dijeron: `¡Levántate! Volvamos a nuestro pueblo', y a la tierra que nos
vio nacer, de la espada opresora''. \bibleverse{17} Allí gritaron: ``El
faraón, rey de Egipto, no es más que un ruido; ha dejado pasar el tiempo
previsto''. \bibleverse{18} ``Vivo yo'', dice el Rey, cuyo nombre es
Yahvé de los Ejércitos, ``seguramente como Tabor entre las montañas, y
como el Carmelo junto al mar, para que venga. \bibleverse{19} Tú, hija
que vives en Egipto, amueblarse para ir al cautiverio; porque Menfis se
convertirá en una desolación, y será quemado, sin habitante.
\bibleverse{20} ``Egipto es una novilla muy hermosa; pero la destrucción
del norte ha llegado. Ha llegado. \bibleverse{21} También sus
jornaleros, en medio de ella, son como terneros de corral, ya que ellos
también son devueltos. Han huido juntos. No se pusieron de pie, porque
les ha llegado el día de su calamidad, el momento de su visita.
\bibleverse{22} Su sonido será como el de la serpiente, pues marcharán
con un ejército, y vienen contra ella con hachas, como cortadores de
madera. \bibleverse{23} Cortarán su bosque'', dice Yahvé, ``aunque no se
puede registrar; porque son más que las langostas, y son innumerables.
\bibleverse{24} La hija de Egipto quedará decepcionada; será entregada a
la mano de los pueblos del norte''.

\bibleverse{25} Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice: ``He
aquí que yo castigaré a Amón de No, al Faraón y a Egipto, con sus dioses
y sus reyes, al Faraón y a los que confían en él. \footnote{\textbf{46:25}
  Jer 43,12} \bibleverse{26} Los entregaré en manos de los que buscan su
vida, en manos de Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, y en manos de sus
servidores. Después será habitada, como en los días de antaño'', dice
Yahvé.

\hypertarget{palabra-de-consuelo-para-israel}{%
\subsection{Palabra de consuelo para
Israel}\label{palabra-de-consuelo-para-israel}}

\bibleverse{27} ``Pero no tengas miedo, Jacob, mi siervo. No te
desanimes, Israel; pues, he aquí que te salvaré desde lejos, y tu
descendencia de la tierra de su cautiverio. Jacob volverá, y estará
tranquilo y a gusto. Nadie le hará tener miedo. \footnote{\textbf{46:27}
  Jer 30,10; Is 44,2} \bibleverse{28} No temas, siervo mío Jacob, dice
Yahvé, ``porque yo estoy con vosotros; porque voy a acabar por completo
con todas las naciones a las que te he expulsado, pero no haré un final
completo de ti, pero te corregiré en la medida, y de ninguna manera te
dejará impune''. \footnote{\textbf{46:28} Jer 30,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{prophecies-against-foreign-peoples-pagans}{%
\subsection{Prophecies against foreign peoples
(pagans)}\label{prophecies-against-foreign-peoples-pagans}}

\hypertarget{section-91}{%
\section{46}\label{section-91}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh's word which came to Jeremiah the prophet
concerning the nations.

\hypertarget{the-proud-march-of-the-egyptians-his-defeat-at-carchemish}{%
\subsection{The proud march of the Egyptians; his defeat at
Carchemish}\label{the-proud-march-of-the-egyptians-his-defeat-at-carchemish}}

\bibleverse{2} Of Egypt: concerning the army of Pharaoh Necoh king of
Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon struck in the fourth year of Jehoiakim
the son of Josiah, king of Judah. \bibleverse{3} ``Prepare the buckler
and shield, and draw near to battle! \bibleverse{4} Harness the horses,
and get up, you horsemen, and stand up with your helmets. Polish the
spears, put on the coats of mail. \bibleverse{5} Why have I seen it?
They are dismayed and are turned backward. Their mighty ones are beaten
down, have fled in haste, and don't look back. Terror is on every
side,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{6} ``Don't let the swift flee away, nor
the mighty man escape. In the north by the river Euphrates they have
stumbled and fallen. \bibleverse{7} ``Who is this who rises up like the
Nile, like rivers whose waters surge? \bibleverse{8} Egypt rises up like
the Nile, like rivers whose waters surge. He says, `I will rise up. I
will cover the earth. I will destroy cities and its inhabitants.'
\bibleverse{9} Go up, you horses! Rage, you chariots! Let the mighty men
go out: Cush and Put, who handle the shield; and the Ludim, who handle
and bend the bow. \bibleverse{10} For that day is of the Lord, Yahweh of
Armies, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge himself of his
adversaries. The sword will devour and be satiated, and will drink its
fill of their blood; for the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, has a sacrifice in
the north country by the river Euphrates. \bibleverse{11} Go up into
Gilead, and take balm, virgin daughter of Egypt. You use many medicines
in vain. There is no healing for you. \bibleverse{12} The nations have
heard of your shame, and the earth is full of your cry; for the mighty
man has stumbled against the mighty, they both fall together.''

\hypertarget{severe-war-anguish-in-egypt-as-a-result-of-nebuchadnezzars-conquest-words-of-comfort-to-israel}{%
\subsection{Severe war anguish in Egypt as a result of Nebuchadnezzar's
conquest; Words of comfort to
Israel}\label{severe-war-anguish-in-egypt-as-a-result-of-nebuchadnezzars-conquest-words-of-comfort-to-israel}}

\bibleverse{13} The word that Yahweh spoke to Jeremiah the prophet, how
that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon should come and strike the land of
Egypt: \bibleverse{14} ``Declare in Egypt, publish in Migdol, and
publish in Memphis and in Tahpanhes; say, `Stand up, and prepare, for
the sword has devoured around you.' \bibleverse{15} Why are your strong
ones swept away? They didn't stand, because Yahweh pushed them.
\bibleverse{16} He made many to stumble. Yes, they fell on one another.
They said, `Arise! Let's go again to our own people, and to the land of
our birth, from the oppressing sword.' \bibleverse{17} They cried there,
`Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he has let the appointed time
pass by.' \bibleverse{18} ``As I live,'' says the King, whose name is
Yahweh of Armies, ``surely like Tabor among the mountains, and like
Carmel by the sea, so he will come. \bibleverse{19} You daughter who
dwells in Egypt, furnish yourself to go into captivity; for Memphis will
become a desolation, and will be burned up, without inhabitant.
\bibleverse{20} ``Egypt is a very beautiful heifer; but destruction out
of the north has come. It has come. \bibleverse{21} Also her hired men
in the middle of her are like calves of the stall, for they also are
turned back. They have fled away together. They didn't stand, for the
day of their calamity has come on them, the time of their visitation.
\bibleverse{22} Its sound will go like the serpent, for they will march
with an army, and come against her with axes, as wood cutters.
\bibleverse{23} They will cut down her forest,'' says Yahweh, ``though
it can't be searched; because they are more than the locusts, and are
innumerable. \bibleverse{24} The daughter of Egypt will be disappointed;
she will be delivered into the hand of the people of the north.''
\bibleverse{25} Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ``Behold, I
will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with her gods and her
kings, even Pharaoh, and those who trust in him. \bibleverse{26} I will
deliver them into the hand of those who seek their lives, and into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his
servants. Afterwards it will be inhabited, as in the days of old,'' says
Yahweh.

\hypertarget{word-of-comfort-for-israel}{%
\subsection{Word of comfort for
Israel}\label{word-of-comfort-for-israel}}

\bibleverse{27} ``But don't you be afraid, Jacob my servant. Don't be
dismayed, Israel; for, behold, I will save you from afar, and your
offspring from the land of their captivity. Jacob will return, and will
be quiet and at ease. No one will make him afraid. \bibleverse{28} Don't
be afraid, O Jacob my servant,'' says Yahweh, ``for I am with you; for I
will make a full end of all the nations where I have driven you, but I
will not make a full end of you, but I will correct you in measure, and
will in no way leave you unpunished.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{diciendo-de-la-tierra-filistea}{%
\subsection{Diciendo de la tierra
filistea}\label{diciendo-de-la-tierra-filistea}}

\hypertarget{section-92}{%
\section{47}\label{section-92}}

\bibleverse{1} Palabra de Yahvé que vino al profeta Jeremías sobre los
filisteos, antes de que el faraón atacara Gaza. \footnote{\textbf{47:1}
  Is 14,29-32; Ezeq 25,15-17}

\bibleverse{2} Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que las aguas suben del norte, y se
convertirá en un arroyo desbordante, y desbordará la tierra y todo lo
que hay en ella, la ciudad y los que la habitan. Los hombres llorarán, y
todos los habitantes de la tierra se lamentarán. \bibleverse{3} Al ruido
del estampido de los cascos de sus fuertes, al correr de sus carros, al
estruendo de sus ruedas, los padres no miran atrás por sus hijosporque
sus manos son muy débiles, \bibleverse{4} por el día que viene para
destruir a todos los filisteos, para cortar de Tiro y de Sidón todo
ayudante que quede; porque Yahvé destruirá a los filisteos, el remanente
de la isla de Caphtor. \bibleverse{5} La calvicie ha llegado a Gaza;
Ashkelon es llevado a la nada. Tú, remanente de su valle, ¿cuánto tiempo
te vas a cortar? \footnote{\textbf{47:5} Am 1,6-8; Sof 2,4; Zac 9,5; Jer
  41,5; Jer 48,37} \bibleverse{6} ``\,`Espada de Yahvé, ¿cuánto tiempo
pasará antes de que te calles? Vuelve a ponerte la vaina; Descansa y
quédate quieto''. \bibleverse{7} ``Cómo puedes estar tranquilo, ya que
Yahvé te ha dado una orden? Contra Ashkelon, y contra la orilla del mar,
allí lo ha designado''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{saying-of-the-philistine-land}{%
\subsection{Saying of the Philistine
land}\label{saying-of-the-philistine-land}}

\hypertarget{section-93}{%
\section{47}\label{section-93}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh's word that came to Jeremiah the prophet
concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh struck Gaza. \bibleverse{2}
Yahweh says: ``Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and will become
an overflowing stream, and will overflow the land and all that is
therein, the city and those who dwell therein. The men will cry, and all
the inhabitants of the land will wail. \bibleverse{3} At the noise of
the stamping of the hoofs of his strong ones, at the rushing of his
chariots, at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers don't look back for
their children because their hands are so feeble, \bibleverse{4} because
of the day that comes to destroy all the Philistines, to cut off from
Tyre and Sidon every helper who remains; for Yahweh will destroy the
Philistines, the remnant of the isle of Caphtor. \bibleverse{5} Baldness
has come on Gaza; Ashkelon is brought to nothing. You remnant of their
valley, how long will you cut yourself? \bibleverse{6} ``\,`You sword of
Yahweh, how long will it be before you are quiet? Put yourself back into
your scabbard; rest, and be still.' \bibleverse{7} ``How can you be
quiet, since Yahweh has given you a command? Against Ashkelon, and
against the seashore, there he has appointed it.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-devastaciuxf3n-de-la-tierra-y-la-huida-general}{%
\subsection{La devastación de la tierra y la huida
general}\label{la-devastaciuxf3n-de-la-tierra-y-la-huida-general}}

\hypertarget{section-94}{%
\section{48}\label{section-94}}

\bibleverse{1} De Moab. Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel, dice:
``¡Ay de Nebo! Porque se ha desechado. Kiriathaim está decepcionado. Se
toma. Misgab\footnote{\textbf{48:1} o, La fortaleza} se pone en
evidenciay se descomponen. \bibleverse{2} La alabanza de Moab ya no
existe. En Hesbón han ideado el mal contra ella: ``¡Vamos! Dejemos de
ser una nación'. Ustedes también, locos, serán llevados al silencio. La
espada te perseguirá. \bibleverse{3} El sonido de un grito de Horonaim,
¡desolación y gran destrucción! \bibleverse{4} Moab es destruido. Sus
pequeños han hecho que se escuche un grito. \bibleverse{5} Porque
subirán por la cuesta de Luhit con llanto continuo. Porque en el
descenso de Horonaim han oído la angustia del grito de destrucción.
\bibleverse{6} ¡Huyan! ¡Salven sus vidas! Sé como el arbusto de enebro
en el desierto. \footnote{\textbf{48:6} Jer 17,6}

\hypertarget{la-culpa-y-el-castigo-de-moab}{%
\subsection{La culpa y el castigo de
Moab}\label{la-culpa-y-el-castigo-de-moab}}

\bibleverse{7} Pues, porque has confiado en tus obras y en tus tesoros,
también será llevado. Chemosh saldrá en cautiverio, sus sacerdotes y sus
príncipes juntos. \footnote{\textbf{48:7} 1Re 11,7} \bibleverse{8} El
destructor vendrá sobre cada ciudad, y ninguna ciudad escapará; el valle
también perecerá, y la llanura será destruida, como ha dicho Yahvé.
\bibleverse{9} Dale alas a Moab, para que pueda volar y alejarse: y sus
ciudades se convertirán en una desolación, sin que nadie habite en
ellas. \bibleverse{10} ``Maldito el que hace la obra de Yahvé con
negligencia; y maldito el que aleja su espada de la sangre. \footnote{\textbf{48:10}
  1Sam 15,3; 1Sam 15,9; 1Sam 15,11}

\hypertarget{el-largo-descanso-y-el-descuido-de-moab-son-seguidos-por-penurias-y-destrucciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{El largo descanso y el descuido de Moab son seguidos por
penurias y
destrucción}\label{el-largo-descanso-y-el-descuido-de-moab-son-seguidos-por-penurias-y-destrucciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{11} ``Moab ha estado tranquilo desde su juventud, y se ha
conformado con sus posos, y no se ha vaciado de buque a buque, ni ha ido
al cautiverio; por lo que su gusto permanece en él, y su olor no se
cambia. \bibleverse{12} Por lo tanto, he aquí que vienen los días'',
dice Yahvé, ``que enviaré a él a los que vierten, y se lo echarán; y
vaciarán sus recipientes, y romper sus contenedores en pedazos.
\bibleverse{13} Moab se avergonzará de Chemosh, como la casa de Israel
se avergonzó de Betel, su confianza. \bibleverse{14} ``¿Cómo decís:
`Somos hombres poderosos, y hombres valientes para la guerra''?
\bibleverse{15} Moab está asolado, y han subido a sus ciudades, y sus
jóvenes elegidos han ido al matadero''. dice el Rey, cuyo nombre es
Yahvé de los Ejércitos. \bibleverse{16} ``La calamidad de Moab está por
llegar, y su aflicción se apresura.

\hypertarget{la-desdichada-miseria-del-pauxeds-y-todas-sus-ciudades}{%
\subsection{La desdichada miseria del país y todas sus
ciudades}\label{la-desdichada-miseria-del-pauxeds-y-todas-sus-ciudades}}

\bibleverse{17} Todos los que estáis a su alrededor, lamentadlo; y todos
los que conocéis su nombre, decís,`Cómo se rompe el báculo fuerte, la
hermosa vara''. \bibleverse{18} ``Tú, hija que habitas en Dibón, baja de
tu gloria, y sentarse en la sed; porque el destructor de Moab ha subido
contra ti. Ha destruido tus fortalezas. \bibleverse{19} Habitante de
Aroer, quédate en el camino y observa. Pregúntale a él que huye, y a
ella que escapa; decir: ``¿Qué se ha hecho? \bibleverse{20} Moab está
decepcionado; ya que se descompone. ¡Llora y llora! Díganlo junto al
Arnón, que Moab está asolado. \bibleverse{21} El juicio ha llegado al
país de la llanura... en Holon, en Jahzah, en Mephaath, \bibleverse{22}
en Dibon, en Nebo, en Beth Diblathaim, \bibleverse{23} en Kiriathaim, en
Beth Gamul, en Beth Meon, \bibleverse{24} en Kerioth, en Bozrah, y sobre
todas las ciudades de la tierra de Moab, lejanas o cercanas.
\bibleverse{25} El cuerno de Moab está cortado, y su brazo está roto'',
dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{nuevo-anuncio-de-devastaciuxf3n-como-castigo-por-el-riduxedculo-de-moab-hacia-israel-y-por-la-arrogancia-de-moab}{%
\subsection{Nuevo anuncio de devastación como castigo por el ridículo de
Moab hacia Israel y por la arrogancia de
Moab}\label{nuevo-anuncio-de-devastaciuxf3n-como-castigo-por-el-riduxedculo-de-moab-hacia-israel-y-por-la-arrogancia-de-moab}}

\bibleverse{26} ``Embriágalo, porque se engrandeció contra Yahvé. Moab
se revolcará en su vómito, y también será objeto de burla. \footnote{\textbf{48:26}
  Jer 25,15} \bibleverse{27} Pues, ¿no era Israel una burla para ti? ¿Se
encontró entre ladrones? Ya que, por más que se hable de él, mueves la
cabeza. \bibleverse{28} Vosotros, habitantes de Moab, dejad las ciudades
y habitad en la roca. Sé como la paloma que hace su nido sobre la boca
del abismo. \bibleverse{29} ``Hemos oído hablar del orgullo de Moab. Es
muy orgulloso en su altivez, su orgullo, su arrogancia, y la arrogancia
de su corazón. \bibleverse{30} Yo conozco su ira --- dice Yahvé ---, que
no es nada; sus fanfarronadas no han hecho nada. \bibleverse{31} Por eso
me lamentaré por Moab. Sí, gritaré por todo Moab. Estarán de luto por
los hombres de Kir Heres. \bibleverse{32} Con más que el llanto de
Jazer. Lloraré por ti, vid de Sibma. Sus ramas pasaron sobre el mar.
Llegaron hasta el mar de Jazer. El destructor ha caído sobre tus frutos
de veranoy en su cosecha. \bibleverse{33} La alegría y el gozo se alejan
del campo fructíferoy de la tierra de Moab. He hecho que el vino deje de
salir de los lagares. Nadie pisará con gritos. El grito no será un
grito.

\hypertarget{nueva-descripciuxf3n-de-la-angustia-de-la-guerra-de-moab-varios-aditivos}{%
\subsection{Nueva descripción de la angustia de la guerra de Moab;
varios
aditivos}\label{nueva-descripciuxf3n-de-la-angustia-de-la-guerra-de-moab-varios-aditivos}}

\bibleverse{34} Desde el grito de Hesbón hasta Elealeh, incluso a Jahaz
han emitido su voz, desde Zoar hasta Horonaim, hasta Eglath Shelishiyah;
porque las aguas de Nimrim también se volverán desoladas.
\bibleverse{35} Además, haré que cese en Moab'', dice Yahvé, ``el que
ofrece en el lugar alto, y al que quema incienso a sus dioses.
\bibleverse{36} Por eso mi corazón suena para Moab como las flautas, y
mi corazón suena como flautas para los hombres de Kir Heres. Por lo
tanto, la abundancia que ha conseguido ha perecido. \footnote{\textbf{48:36}
  Jer 4,19; Is 15,7; Is 16,11} \bibleverse{37} Porque toda cabeza es
calva, y todas las barbas recortadas. Hay cortes en todas las manos, y
un saco en la cintura. \footnote{\textbf{48:37} Jer 47,5}
\bibleverse{38} En todos los tejados de Moab, y en sus calles, hay
lamentos por todas partes; porque he roto a Moab como una vasija en la
que nadie se deleita'', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{39} ``¡Cómo se rompe!
¡Cómo se lamentan! ¡Cómo Moab ha vuelto la espalda con vergüenza! Así
que Moab se convertirá en una burlay un terror para todos los que le
rodean''.

\hypertarget{el-juicio-y-sus-devastadoras-consecuencias-reconfortante-referencia-a-la-restauraciuxf3n-de-moab}{%
\subsection{El juicio y sus devastadoras consecuencias; reconfortante
referencia a la restauración de
Moab}\label{el-juicio-y-sus-devastadoras-consecuencias-reconfortante-referencia-a-la-restauraciuxf3n-de-moab}}

\bibleverse{40} Porque Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que volará como un águila,
y extenderá sus alas contra Moab. \footnote{\textbf{48:40} Jer 49,22}
\bibleverse{41} Kerioth está tomada, y las fortalezas son tomadas. El
corazón de los hombres poderosos de Moab en ese díaserá como el corazón
de una mujer en sus dolores. \bibleverse{42} Moab será destruido de ser
un pueblo, porque se ha engrandecido contra Yahvé. \bibleverse{43} El
terror, la fosa y la trampa están sobre ti, habitante de Moab'', dice
Yahvé. \bibleverse{44} ``El que huye del terror caerá en la fosa; y el
que se levante de la fosa será tomado en la trampa, porque yo traeré
sobre él, incluso sobre Moab, el año de su visita'', dice Yahvé.
\footnote{\textbf{48:44} Is 24,17-18} \bibleverse{45} ``Los que huyeron
se quedaron sin fuerzas bajo la sombra de Hesbón; porque el fuego ha
salido de Hesbón, y una llama del medio de Sihon, y ha devorado el
rincón de Moab, y la corona de la cabeza de los tumultuosos. \footnote{\textbf{48:45}
  Núm 21,28-29} \bibleverse{46} ¡Ay de ti, Moab! El pueblo de Chemosh
está deshecho; porque tus hijos son llevados cautivos, y tus hijas en
cautiverio. \bibleverse{47} ``Sin embargo, revertiré el cautiverio de
Moab en los últimos días,''dice Yahvé. Hasta aquí el juicio de Moab.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-devastation-of-the-land-and-the-general-flight}{%
\subsection{The devastation of the land and the general
flight}\label{the-devastation-of-the-land-and-the-general-flight}}

\hypertarget{section-95}{%
\section{48}\label{section-95}}

\bibleverse{1} Of Moab. Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ``Woe
to Nebo! For it is laid waste. Kiriathaim is disappointed. It is taken.
Misgab\footnote{\textbf{48:1} or, The stronghold} is put to shame and
broken down. \bibleverse{2} The praise of Moab is no more. In Heshbon
they have devised evil against her: `Come! Let's cut her off from being
a nation.' You also, Madmen, will be brought to silence. The sword will
pursue you. \bibleverse{3} The sound of a cry from Horonaim, desolation
and great destruction! \bibleverse{4} Moab is destroyed. Her little ones
have caused a cry to be heard. \bibleverse{5} For they will go up by the
ascent of Luhith with continual weeping. For at the descent of Horonaim
they have heard the distress of the cry of destruction. \bibleverse{6}
Flee! Save your lives! Be like the juniper bush in the wilderness.

\hypertarget{the-guilt-and-punishment-of-moab}{%
\subsection{The Guilt and Punishment of
Moab}\label{the-guilt-and-punishment-of-moab}}

\bibleverse{7} For, because you have trusted in your works and in your
treasures, you also will be taken. Chemosh will go out into captivity,
his priests and his princes together. \bibleverse{8} The destroyer will
come on every city, and no city will escape; the valley also will
perish, and the plain will be destroyed, as Yahweh has spoken.
\bibleverse{9} Give wings to Moab, that she may fly and get herself
away: and her cities will become a desolation, without anyone to dwell
in them. \bibleverse{10} ``Cursed is he who does the work of Yahweh
negligently; and cursed is he who keeps back his sword from blood.

\hypertarget{moabs-long-rest-and-neglect-are-followed-by-hardship-and-destruction}{%
\subsection{Moab's long rest and neglect are followed by hardship and
destruction}\label{moabs-long-rest-and-neglect-are-followed-by-hardship-and-destruction}}

\bibleverse{11} ``Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has
settled on his dregs, and has not been emptied from vessel to vessel,
neither has he gone into captivity; therefore his taste remains in him,
and his scent is not changed. \bibleverse{12} Therefore behold, the days
come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will send to him those who pour off, and
they will pour him off; and they will empty his vessels, and break their
containers in pieces. \bibleverse{13} Moab will be ashamed of Chemosh,
as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, their confidence.
\bibleverse{14} ``How do you say, `We are mighty men, and valiant men
for the war'? \bibleverse{15} Moab is laid waste, and they have gone up
into his cities, and his chosen young men have gone down to the
slaughter,'' says the King, whose name is Yahweh of Armies.
\bibleverse{16} ``The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his
affliction hurries fast.

\hypertarget{the-wretched-misery-of-the-country-and-all-its-cities}{%
\subsection{The wretched misery of the country and all its
cities}\label{the-wretched-misery-of-the-country-and-all-its-cities}}

\bibleverse{17} All you who are around him, bemoan him; and all you who
know his name, say, `How the strong staff is broken, the beautiful rod!'
\bibleverse{18} ``You daughter who dwells in Dibon, come down from your
glory, and sit in thirst; for the destroyer of Moab has come up against
you. He has destroyed your strongholds. \bibleverse{19} Inhabitant of
Aroer, stand by the way and watch. Ask him who flees, and her who
escapes; say, `What has been done?' \bibleverse{20} Moab is
disappointed; for it is broken down. Wail and cry! Tell it by the Arnon,
that Moab is laid waste. \bibleverse{21} Judgment has come on the plain
country--- on Holon, on Jahzah, on Mephaath, \bibleverse{22} on Dibon,
on Nebo, on Beth Diblathaim, \bibleverse{23} on Kiriathaim, on Beth
Gamul, on Beth Meon, \bibleverse{24} on Kerioth, on Bozrah, and on all
the cities of the land of Moab, far or near. \bibleverse{25} The horn of
Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{new-announcement-of-devastation-as-punishment-for-moabs-ridicule-of-israel-and-for-moabs-arrogance}{%
\subsection{New announcement of devastation as punishment for Moab's
ridicule of Israel and for Moab's
arrogance}\label{new-announcement-of-devastation-as-punishment-for-moabs-ridicule-of-israel-and-for-moabs-arrogance}}

\bibleverse{26} ``Make him drunk, for he magnified himself against
Yahweh. Moab will wallow in his vomit, and he also will be in derision.
\bibleverse{27} For wasn't Israel a derision to you? Was he found among
thieves? For as often as you speak of him, you shake your head.
\bibleverse{28} You inhabitants of Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in
the rock. Be like the dove that makes her nest over the mouth of the
abyss. \bibleverse{29} ``We have heard of the pride of Moab. He is very
proud in his loftiness, his pride, his arrogance, and the arrogance of
his heart. \bibleverse{30} I know his wrath,'' says Yahweh, ``that it is
nothing; his boastings have done nothing. \bibleverse{31} Therefore I
will wail for Moab. Yes, I will cry out for all Moab. They will mourn
for the men of Kir Heres. \bibleverse{32} With more than the weeping of
Jazer I will weep for you, vine of Sibmah. Your branches passed over the
sea. They reached even to the sea of Jazer. The destroyer has fallen on
your summer fruits and on your vintage. \bibleverse{33} Gladness and joy
is taken away from the fruitful field and from the land of Moab. I have
caused wine to cease from the wine presses. No one will tread with
shouting. The shouting will be no shouting.

\hypertarget{new-description-of-moabs-war-anguish-various-additives}{%
\subsection{New description of Moab's war anguish; various
additives}\label{new-description-of-moabs-war-anguish-various-additives}}

\bibleverse{34} From the cry of Heshbon even to Elealeh, even to Jahaz
they have uttered their voice, from Zoar even to Horonaim, to Eglath
Shelishiyah; for the waters of Nimrim will also become desolate.
\bibleverse{35} Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab,'' says Yahweh,
``him who offers in the high place, and him who burns incense to his
gods. \bibleverse{36} Therefore my heart sounds for Moab like flutes,
and my heart sounds like flutes for the men of Kir Heres. Therefore the
abundance that he has gotten has perished. \bibleverse{37} For every
head is bald, and every beard clipped. There are cuttings on all the
hands, and sackcloth on the waist. \bibleverse{38} On all the housetops
of Moab, and in its streets, there is lamentation everywhere; for I have
broken Moab like a vessel in which no one delights,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{39} ``How it is broken down! How they wail! How Moab has
turned the back with shame! So will Moab become a derision and a terror
to all who are around him.''

\hypertarget{the-trial-and-its-devastating-consequences-comforting-reference-to-the-restoration-of-moab}{%
\subsection{The trial and its devastating consequences; comforting
reference to the restoration of
Moab}\label{the-trial-and-its-devastating-consequences-comforting-reference-to-the-restoration-of-moab}}

\bibleverse{40} For Yahweh says: ``Behold, he will fly as an eagle, and
will spread out his wings against Moab. \bibleverse{41} Kerioth is
taken, and the strongholds are seized. The heart of the mighty men of
Moab at that day will be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
\bibleverse{42} Moab will be destroyed from being a people, because he
has magnified himself against Yahweh. \bibleverse{43} Terror, the pit,
and the snare are on you, inhabitant of Moab,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{44} ``He who flees from the terror will fall into the pit;
and he who gets up out of the pit will be taken in the snare, for I will
bring on him, even on Moab, the year of their visitation,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{45} ``Those who fled stand without strength under the shadow
of Heshbon; for a fire has gone out of Heshbon, and a flame from the
middle of Sihon, and has devoured the corner of Moab, and the crown of
the head of the tumultuous ones. \bibleverse{46} Woe to you, O Moab! The
people of Chemosh are undone; for your sons are taken away captive, and
your daughters into captivity. \bibleverse{47} ``Yet I will reverse the
captivity of Moab in the latter days,'' says Yahweh. Thus far is the
judgment of Moab.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{hablando-de-los-amonitas}{%
\subsection{Hablando de los amonitas}\label{hablando-de-los-amonitas}}

\hypertarget{section-96}{%
\section{49}\label{section-96}}

\bibleverse{1} De los hijos de Amón. Yahvé dice: ``¿No tiene Israel
hijos? ¿No tiene heredero? ¿Por qué entonces Malcam posee a Gad, y su
pueblo habita en sus ciudades? \footnote{\textbf{49:1} Ezeq 25,2-7; Am
  1,13-15; Sof 2,8-11; 1Re 11,5} \bibleverse{2} Por lo tanto, he aquí
que los días vienen,''dice Yahvé, ``que haré que se oiga una alarma de
guerra contra Rabá de los hijos de Amón, y se convertirá en un montón
desolado, y sus hijas serán quemadas con fuego; entonces Israel poseerá
a los que lo poseyeron''. dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{3} ``¡Llora, Hesbón,
porque Hai ha sido arrasada! ¡Llorad, hijas de Rabá! Vístete de tela de
saco. Lamentar, y correr de un lado a otro entre las vallas; porque
Malcam irá al cautiverio, sus sacerdotes y sus príncipes juntos.
\footnote{\textbf{49:3} Jer 49,1} \bibleverse{4} ¿Por qué te jactas en
los valles, tu valle fluyente, hija reincidente? Confiaste en sus
tesoros, diciendo: ``¿Quién vendrá a mí? \bibleverse{5} He aquí que
traeré un terror sobre ti''. dice el Señor, Yahvé de los Ejércitos, ``de
todos los que te rodean. Todos ustedes serán expulsados por completo, y
no habrá nadie que reúna a los fugitivos. \bibleverse{6} ``Pero después
revertiré el cautiverio de los hijos de Amón''. dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{49:6}
  Jer 48,47}

\hypertarget{dichos-sobre-los-edomitas}{%
\subsection{Dichos sobre los edomitas}\label{dichos-sobre-los-edomitas}}

\bibleverse{7} De Edom, dice el Señor de los Ejércitos: ``¿Ya no hay
sabiduría en Teman? ¿Ha perecido el consejo de los prudentes? ¿Ha
desaparecido su sabiduría? \footnote{\textbf{49:7} Is 21,11; Is 34,5-15;
  Ezeq 25,12-14; Am 1,11; Am 1,1-12; Abd 1,1} \bibleverse{8} ¡Huye!
¡Vuelve! Morad en las profundidades, habitantes de Dedán; porque traeré
sobre él la calamidad de Esaú cuando lo visite. \bibleverse{9} Si los
recolectores de uva vinieran a ti, ¿no dejarían algunas uvas espigadas?
Si los ladrones vinieran de noche, ¿no robarían hasta tener suficiente?
\bibleverse{10} Pero yo he desnudado a Esaú, He descubierto sus lugares
secretos, y no podrá esconderse. Su descendencia es destruida, con sus
hermanos y sus vecinos; y ya no existe. \bibleverse{11} Deja a tus hijos
sin padre. Los conservaré vivos. Que sus viudas confíen en mí''.

\bibleverse{12} Porque Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que aquellos a quienes no
correspondía beber del cáliz, ciertamente beberán; ¿y tú eres el que en
conjunto quedará impune? No quedarás impune, sino que ciertamente
beberás. \footnote{\textbf{49:12} Jer 25,15; Jer 25,21} \bibleverse{13}
Porque he jurado por mí mismo --- dice el Señor --- que Bosra se
convertirá en un asombro, en un oprobio, en una ruina y en una
maldición. Todas sus ciudades serán desechos perpetuos''. \footnote{\textbf{49:13}
  Jer 44,12} \bibleverse{14} He oído noticias de Yahvé, y se envía un
embajador entre las naciones, diciendo: ``¡Reúnanse! ¡Vengan contra
ella! Levántate a la batalla''. \bibleverse{15} ``Porque he aquí que te
he hecho pequeño entre las naciones, y despreciado entre los hombres.
\bibleverse{16} En cuanto a tu terror, el orgullo de tu corazón te ha
engañado, Oh, tú que habitas en las hendiduras de la roca, que mantienen
la altura de la colina, aunque deberías hacer tu nido tan alto como el
del águila, Te haré bajar de allí'', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{17} ``Edom
se convertirá en un asombro. Todos los que pasen por allí se quedarán
asombrados, y silbará todas sus plagas. \footnote{\textbf{49:17} Jer
  50,13} \bibleverse{18} Como en el derrocamiento de Sodoma y Gomorra y
sus ciudades vecinas'', dice Yahvé, ``ningún hombre habitará allí, ni
ningún hijo de hombre vivirá en ella. \footnote{\textbf{49:18} Is 1,9}
\bibleverse{19} ``He aquí que subirá como un león desde la soberbia del
Jordán contra la fuerte morada; porque de repente haré que huyan de
ella, y quien sea elegido, Lo nombraré por encima. Porque ¿quién es como
yo? ¿Quién me designará una hora? ¿Quién es el pastor que estará delante
de mí?'' \footnote{\textbf{49:19} Jer 50,44} \bibleverse{20} Escucha,
pues, el consejo de Yahvé, que ha tomado contra Edom, y sus propósitos
que se ha propuesto contra los habitantes de Temán: Seguramente los
arrastrarán, los pequeños del rebaño. Seguramente hará que su morada
quede desolada sobre ellos. \bibleverse{21} La tierra tiembla con el
ruido de su caída; hay un grito, el ruido que se oye en el Mar Rojo.
\bibleverse{22} He aquí que subirá y volará como el águila, y extendió
sus alas contra Bozra. El corazón de los hombres poderosos de Edom en
ese día será como el corazón de una mujer en sus dolores. \footnote{\textbf{49:22}
  Jer 48,40}

\hypertarget{diciendo-de-damasco}{%
\subsection{Diciendo de Damasco}\label{diciendo-de-damasco}}

\bibleverse{23} de Damasco: ``Hamat y Arpad están confundidos, porque
han escuchado malas noticias. Se han derretido. Hay dolor en el mar. No
puede estar tranquilo. \footnote{\textbf{49:23} Is 17,1; Am 1,3-5}
\bibleverse{24} Damasco se ha debilitado, se gira para huir, y el
temblor se ha apoderado de ella. La angustia y las penas se han
apoderado de ella, como la de una mujer con dolores de parto.
\bibleverse{25} Cómo no está abandonada la ciudad de la alabanza, ¿la
ciudad de mi alegría? \bibleverse{26} Por eso sus jóvenes caerán en sus
calles, y todos los hombres de guerra serán silenciados en ese día''.
dice el Señor de los Ejércitos. \bibleverse{27} ``Encenderé un fuego en
el muro de Damasco, y devorará los palacios de Ben Hadad''.

\hypertarget{sobre-los-cedarienses-y-otras-tribus-uxe1rabes}{%
\subsection{Sobre los Cedarienses y otras tribus
árabes}\label{sobre-los-cedarienses-y-otras-tribus-uxe1rabes}}

\bibleverse{28} De Cedar y de los reinos de Hazor, que Nabucodonosor,
rey de Babilonia, hirió, dice Yahvé: ``Levántate, sube a Kedar, y
destruir a los hijos del este. \footnote{\textbf{49:28} Is 21,16-17; Jos
  11,10} \bibleverse{29} Tomarán sus tiendas y sus rebaños. se llevarán
para sí sus cortinas, todos sus barcos y sus camellos; y les gritarán:
``¡Terror por todos lados! \bibleverse{30} ¡Huye! ¡Vaya por donde vaya!
Morad en las profundidades, habitantes de Hazor'', dice Yahvé; ``porque
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, ha tomado consejo contra ti, y ha
concebido un propósito contra ti. \footnote{\textbf{49:30} Jer 49,8}
\bibleverse{31} ¡Levántate! Sube a una nación que esté tranquila, que
habita sin cuidado'', dice Yahvé; ``que no tiene ni puertas ni barrotes,
que mora solo. \bibleverse{32} Sus camellos serán un botín, y la
multitud de su ganado un botín. Esparciré a todos los vientos a los que
se les corten las comisuras de la barba; y traeré su calamidad por todos
lados''. dice Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{49:32} Jer 9,26; Jer 25,23}
\bibleverse{33} Hazor será una morada de chacales, una desolación para
siempre. Ningún hombre habitará allí, ni ningún hijo de hombre vivirá en
ella''. \footnote{\textbf{49:33} Jer 9,11}

\hypertarget{diciendo-sobre-elam}{%
\subsection{Diciendo sobre Elam}\label{diciendo-sobre-elam}}

\bibleverse{34} Palabra de Yahvé que vino al profeta Jeremías sobre
Elam, al principio del reinado de Sedequías, rey de Judá, diciendo:
\footnote{\textbf{49:34} Jer 25,25} \bibleverse{35} ``Dice Yahvé de los
Ejércitos:`He aquí que voy a romper el arco de Elam, el jefe de su
poderío. \bibleverse{36} Traeré sobre Elam los cuatro vientos de las
cuatro partes del cielo, y los dispersará hacia todos esos vientos. No
habrá nación a la que no lleguen los desterrados de Elam.
\bibleverse{37} Haré que Elam quede consternado ante sus enemigos, y
ante los que buscan su vida. Traeré el mal sobre ellos, hasta mi feroz
ira', dice Yahvé; y enviaré la espada tras ellos, hasta que los haya
consumido. \bibleverse{38} Yo pondré mi trono en Elam, y destruiré desde
allí al rey y a los príncipes', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{39} `Pero
sucederá en los últimos díasque revertiré el cautiverio de Elam', dice
Yahvé''. \footnote{\textbf{49:39} Jer 49,6}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{speaking-of-the-ammonites}{%
\subsection{Speaking of the ammonites}\label{speaking-of-the-ammonites}}

\hypertarget{section-97}{%
\section{49}\label{section-97}}

\bibleverse{1} Of the children of Ammon. Yahweh says: ``Has Israel no
sons? Has he no heir? Why then does Malcam possess Gad, and his people
dwell in its cities? \bibleverse{2} Therefore behold, the days come,''
says Yahweh, ``that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard against
Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and it will become a desolate heap, and
her daughters will be burned with fire; then Israel will possess those
who possessed him,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{3} ``Wail, Heshbon, for Ai
is laid waste! Cry, you daughters of Rabbah! Clothe yourself in
sackcloth. Lament, and run back and forth among the fences; for Malcam
will go into captivity, his priests and his princes together.
\bibleverse{4} Why do you boast in the valleys, your flowing valley,
backsliding daughter? You trusted in her treasures, saying, `Who will
come to me?' \bibleverse{5} Behold, I will bring a terror on you,'' says
the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, ``from all who are around you. All of you
will be driven completely out, and there will be no one to gather
together the fugitives. \bibleverse{6} ``But afterward I will reverse
the captivity of the children of Ammon,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{sayings-about-the-edomites}{%
\subsection{Sayings about the
Edomites}\label{sayings-about-the-edomites}}

\bibleverse{7} Of Edom, Yahweh of Armies says: ``Is wisdom no more in
Teman? Has counsel perished from the prudent? Has their wisdom vanished?
\bibleverse{8} Flee! Turn back! Dwell in the depths, inhabitants of
Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau on him when I visit him.
\bibleverse{9} If grape gatherers came to you, would they not leave some
gleaning grapes? If thieves came by night, wouldn't they steal until
they had enough? \bibleverse{10} But I have made Esau bare, I have
uncovered his secret places, and he will not be able to hide himself.
His offspring is destroyed, with his brothers and his neighbors; and he
is no more. \bibleverse{11} Leave your fatherless children. I will
preserve them alive. Let your widows trust in me.'' \bibleverse{12} For
Yahweh says: ``Behold, they to whom it didn't pertain to drink of the
cup will certainly drink; and are you he who will altogether go
unpunished? You won't go unpunished, but you will surely drink.
\bibleverse{13} For I have sworn by myself,'' says Yahweh, ``that Bozrah
will become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste, and a curse. All its
cities will be perpetual wastes.'' \bibleverse{14} I have heard news
from Yahweh, and an ambassador is sent among the nations, saying,
``Gather yourselves together! Come against her! Rise up to the battle!''
\bibleverse{15} ``For, behold, I have made you small among the nations,
and despised among men. \bibleverse{16} As for your terror, the pride of
your heart has deceived you, O you who dwell in the clefts of the rock,
who hold the height of the hill, though you should make your nest as
high as the eagle, I will bring you down from there,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{17} ``Edom will become an astonishment. Everyone who passes
by it will be astonished, and will hiss at all its plagues.
\bibleverse{18} As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and its
neighbor cities,'' says Yahweh, ``no man will dwell there, neither will
any son of man live therein. \bibleverse{19} ``Behold, he will come up
like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation;
for I will suddenly make them run away from it, and whoever is chosen, I
will appoint him over it. For who is like me? Who will appoint me a
time? Who is the shepherd who will stand before me?'' \bibleverse{20}
Therefore hear the counsel of Yahweh, that he has taken against Edom,
and his purposes that he has purposed against the inhabitants of Teman:
Surely they will drag them away, the little ones of the flock. Surely he
will make their habitation desolate over them. \bibleverse{21} The earth
trembles at the noise of their fall; there is a cry, the noise which is
heard in the Red Sea. \bibleverse{22} Behold, he will come up and fly as
the eagle, and spread out his wings against Bozrah. The heart of the
mighty men of Edom at that day will be as the heart of a woman in her
pangs.

\hypertarget{damascus-saying}{%
\subsection{Damascus Saying}\label{damascus-saying}}

\bibleverse{23} Of Damascus: ``Hamath and Arpad are confounded, for they
have heard evil news. They have melted away. There is sorrow on the sea.
It can't be quiet. \bibleverse{24} Damascus has grown feeble, she turns
herself to flee, and trembling has seized her. Anguish and sorrows have
taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail. \bibleverse{25} How is the
city of praise not forsaken, the city of my joy? \bibleverse{26}
Therefore her young men will fall in her streets, and all the men of war
will be brought to silence in that day,'' says Yahweh of Armies.
\bibleverse{27} ``I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it
will devour the palaces of Ben Hadad.''

\hypertarget{about-the-cedarians-and-other-arab-tribes}{%
\subsection{About the Cedarians and other Arab
tribes}\label{about-the-cedarians-and-other-arab-tribes}}

\bibleverse{28} Of Kedar, and of the kingdoms of Hazor, which
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon struck, Yahweh says: ``Arise, go up to
Kedar, and destroy the children of the east. \bibleverse{29} They will
take their tents and their flocks. they will carry away for themselves
their curtains, all their vessels, and their camels; and they will cry
to them, `Terror on every side!' \bibleverse{30} Flee! Wander far off!
Dwell in the depths, you inhabitants of Hazor,'' says Yahweh; ``for
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has taken counsel against you, and has
conceived a purpose against you. \bibleverse{31} Arise! Go up to a
nation that is at ease, that dwells without care,'' says Yahweh; ``that
has neither gates nor bars, that dwells alone. \bibleverse{32} Their
camels will be a booty, and the multitude of their livestock a plunder.
I will scatter to all winds those who have the corners of their beards
cut off; and I will bring their calamity from every side of them,'' says
Yahweh. \bibleverse{33} Hazor will be a dwelling place of jackals, a
desolation forever. No man will dwell there, neither will any son of man
live therein.''

\hypertarget{saying-about-elam}{%
\subsection{Saying about Elam}\label{saying-about-elam}}

\bibleverse{34} Yahweh's word that came to Jeremiah the prophet
concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of
Judah, saying, \bibleverse{35} ``Yahweh of Armies says: `Behold, I will
break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might. \bibleverse{36} I will
bring on Elam the four winds from the four quarters of the sky, and will
scatter them toward all those winds. There will be no nation where the
outcasts of Elam will not come. \bibleverse{37} I will cause Elam to be
dismayed before their enemies, and before those who seek their life. I
will bring evil on them, even my fierce anger,' says Yahweh; `and I will
send the sword after them, until I have consumed them. \bibleverse{38} I
will set my throne in Elam, and will destroy from there king and
princes,' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{39} `But it will happen in the latter
days that I will reverse the captivity of Elam,' says Yahweh.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-cauxedda-de-babilonia-y-su-importancia-para-el-sufrido-pueblo-juduxedo}{%
\subsection{La caída de Babilonia y su importancia para el sufrido
pueblo
judío}\label{la-cauxedda-de-babilonia-y-su-importancia-para-el-sufrido-pueblo-juduxedo}}

\hypertarget{section-98}{%
\section{50}\label{section-98}}

\bibleverse{1} La palabra que Yahvé habló sobre Babilonia, sobre la
tierra de los caldeos, por medio del profeta Jeremías. \footnote{\textbf{50:1}
  Is 13,1; Is 14,1-14} \bibleverse{2} ``Anunciad entre las naciones y
publicad, y establecer una norma; publicar, y no ocultar; dicen,
`Babilonia ha sido tomada, Bel está decepcionada, ¡Merodach está
consternado! Sus imágenes son decepcionantes. Sus ídolos están
consternados'. \footnote{\textbf{50:2} Is 46,1} \bibleverse{3} Porque
una nación sube del norte contra ella, que hará que su tierra quede
desolada, y nadie habitará en ella. Han huido. Se han ido, tanto del
hombre como del animal. \bibleverse{4} ``En aquellos días y en aquel
tiempo'', dice Yahvé, ``Los hijos de Israel vendrán, ellos y los hijos
de Judá juntos; seguirán su camino llorando, y buscarán a Yahvé, su
Dios. \footnote{\textbf{50:4} Jer 31,9} \bibleverse{5} Preguntarán por
Sión con el rostro vuelto hacia ella, diciendo: ``Venid y uníos a Yahvé
en un pacto eternoque no será olvidado''. \bibleverse{6} Mi pueblo ha
sido una oveja perdida. Sus pastores les han hecho extraviarse. Los han
rechazado en las montañas. Han pasado de la montaña a la colina. Han
olvidado su lugar de descanso. \bibleverse{7} Todos los que los
encontraron los devoraron. Sus adversarios dijeron: `No somos
culpables', porque han pecado contra Yahvé, la morada de la justicia, el
Señor, la esperanza de sus padres''. \bibleverse{8} ``¡Huye de en medio
de Babilonia! Sal de la tierra de los caldeos, y ser como los machos
cabríos ante los rebaños. \footnote{\textbf{50:8} Jer 51,6; Jer 51,45}
\bibleverse{9} Porque, he aquí que voy a suscitary haz subir contra
Babilonia una compañía de grandes naciones del país del norte; y se
pondrán en fila contra ella. Se la llevarán de allí. Sus flechas serán
como las de un poderoso experto. Ninguno de ellos volverá en vano.
\bibleverse{10} Caldea será una presa. Todos los que se aprovechan de
ella quedarán satisfechos'', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{11} ``Porque te
alegras, porque te alegras, Oh, tú que saqueas mi herencia, porque eres
licenciosa como una vaquilla que pisa el grano, y relinchar como
caballos fuertes, \footnote{\textbf{50:11} Deut 32,27; Is 10,5; Is 10,7;
  Is 10,15} \bibleverse{12} tu madre estará totalmente decepcionada. La
que te parió será confundida. He aquí que ella será la más pequeña de
las naciones, un desierto, una tierra árida y una zona desértica.
\bibleverse{13} A causa de la ira de Yahvé no será habitada, pero estará
totalmente desolada. Todos los que pasen por Babilonia se quedarán
asombrados, y sisea en todas sus plagas. \footnote{\textbf{50:13} Jer
  51,37; Jer 49,17} \bibleverse{14} Poneos en guardia contra Babilonia
por todas partes, a todos los que doblan el arco; disparar contra ella.
No escatimes en flechas, porque ha pecado contra Yahvé. \bibleverse{15}
Griten contra ella todos. Se ha sometido a sí misma. Sus baluartes han
caído. Sus muros han sido derribados, porque es la venganza de Yahvé.
Véngate de ella. Como ella ha hecho, hazle a ella. \footnote{\textbf{50:15}
  Apoc 18,6} \bibleverse{16} Corta el sembrador de Babilonia, y el que
maneja la hoz en el tiempo de la cosecha. Por miedo a la espada
opresora, cada uno de ellos regresará a su propio pueblo, y cada uno
huirá a su tierra.

\hypertarget{la-desgracia-anterior-de-israel-y-la-salvaciuxf3n-posterior}{%
\subsection{La desgracia anterior de Israel y la salvación
posterior}\label{la-desgracia-anterior-de-israel-y-la-salvaciuxf3n-posterior}}

\bibleverse{17} ``Israel es una oveja cazada. Los leones lo han
ahuyentado. Primero, el rey de Asiria lo devoró, y ahora por fin
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, le ha roto los huesos''.

\bibleverse{18} Por eso dice el Señor de los Ejércitos, el Dios de
Israel: ``He aquí que yo castigaré al rey de Babilonia y a su tierra,
como he castigado al rey de Asiria. \bibleverse{19} Volveré a llevar a
Israel a sus pastos, y se alimentará del Carmelo y del Basán. Su alma
será satisfecha en las colinas de Efraín y en Galaad. \bibleverse{20} En
aquellos días y en aquel tiempo'', dice Yahvé, ``la iniquidad de Israel
será buscada, y no habrá ninguno, también los pecados de Judá, y no se
encontrarán; porque yo perdonaré a los que deje como remanente.
\footnote{\textbf{50:20} Jer 31,34; Jer 33,8}

\hypertarget{contra-el-pauxeds-doble-desafuxedo}{%
\subsection{Contra el país ``doble
desafío''}\label{contra-el-pauxeds-doble-desafuxedo}}

\bibleverse{21} ``Sube contra la tierra de Merathaim, incluso contra
ella, y contra los habitantes de Pekod. Maten y destruyan por completo
después de ellos'', dice Yahvé, ``y haced todo lo que os he mandado.
\bibleverse{22} Un sonido de batalla está en la tierra, y de gran
destrucción. \bibleverse{23} ¡Cómo se corta y se rompe el martillo de
toda la tierra! ¡Cómo se ha convertido Babilonia en una desolación entre
las naciones! \footnote{\textbf{50:23} Jer 51,20} \bibleverse{24} Te he
tendido una trampa, y tú también estás tomada, Babilonia, y tú no eras
consciente. Te han encontrado, y también se ha capturado, porque has
luchado contra Yahvé. \bibleverse{25} Yahvé ha abierto su arsenal, y ha
sacado las armas de su indignación; porque el Señor, Yahvé de los
Ejércitos, tiene una obra que hacer en la tierra de los caldeos.
\bibleverse{26} Vengan contra ella desde la frontera más lejana. Abre
sus almacenes. Echadla como si fuera un montón. Destrúyela por completo.
Que no quede nada de ella. \bibleverse{27} Mata a todos sus toros. Que
vayan al matadero. ¡Ay de ellos! Porque su día ha llegado, el momento de
su visita. \bibleverse{28} Escucha a los que huyen y escapan de la
tierra de Babilonia, para anunciar en Sión la venganza de Yahvé, nuestro
Dios, la venganza de su templo. \bibleverse{29} ``Convoca a los arqueros
contra Babilonia, todos los que doblan el arco. Acampa contra ella por
todos lados. Que no se le escape nada. Págale de acuerdo a su trabajo.
De acuerdo con todo lo que ha hecho, hazle; porque se ha ensoberbecido
contra Yahvé, contra el Santo de Israel. \footnote{\textbf{50:29} Jer
  50,15} \bibleverse{30} Por eso sus jóvenes caerán en sus calles. Todos
sus hombres de guerra serán silenciados en ese día'', dice Yahvé.
\bibleverse{31} ``He aquí que estoy contra ti, soberbio'', dice el
Señor, Yahvé de los Ejércitos; ``porque su día ha llegado, la hora en
que te visitaré. \bibleverse{32} El orgulloso tropezará y caerá, y nadie
lo levantará. Encenderé un fuego en sus ciudades, y devorará a todos los
que estén a su alrededor''.

\hypertarget{anunciaciuxf3n-a-israel}{%
\subsection{Anunciación a Israel}\label{anunciaciuxf3n-a-israel}}

\bibleverse{33} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice: ``Los hijos de Israel y
los hijos de Judá están oprimidos juntos. Todos los que los tomaron
cautivos los retienen. Se niegan a dejarlos ir. \bibleverse{34} Su
Redentor es fuerte. Yavé de los Ejércitos es su nombre. Defenderá a
fondo su causa, para dar descanso a la tierra, y perturbar a los
habitantes de Babilonia.

\hypertarget{espada-diciendo}{%
\subsection{Espada diciendo}\label{espada-diciendo}}

\bibleverse{35} ``Una espada está sobre los caldeos'', dice Yahvé, ``y
sobre los habitantes de Babilonia, en sus príncipes, y en sus sabios.
\bibleverse{36} Una espada está sobre los fanfarrones, y se convertirán
en tontos. Una espada está sobre sus poderosos hombres, y estarán
consternados. \bibleverse{37} Una espada está sobre sus caballos, en sus
carros, y en todas las personas mixtas que están en medio de ella; y se
convertirán en mujeres. Una espada está en sus tesoros, y serán robados.
\footnote{\textbf{50:37} Jer 51,30} \bibleverse{38} Una sequía está
sobre sus aguas, y se secarán; porque es una tierra de imágenes
grabadas, y están locos por los ídolos.

\hypertarget{varias-adiciones-y-repeticiones}{%
\subsection{Varias adiciones y
repeticiones}\label{varias-adiciones-y-repeticiones}}

\bibleverse{39} Por eso los animales salvajes del desiertocon los lobos
morarán allí. Las avestruces habitarán en ella. Ya no será habitada para
siempre, tampoco se vivirá de generación en generación. \bibleverse{40}
Como cuando Dios derribó a Sodoma y Gomorra y a sus ciudades vecinas'',
dice Yahvé, ``para que ningún hombre habite allí, ni ningún hijo de
hombre vivirá en ella. \footnote{\textbf{50:40} Gén 19,24-25}
\bibleverse{41} ``He aquí que un pueblo viene del norte. Una gran nación
y muchos reyes serán levantados desde los confines de la tierra.
\footnote{\textbf{50:41} Jer 50,9} \bibleverse{42} Toman el arco y la
lanza. Son crueles y no tienen piedad. Su voz ruge como el mar. Van a
caballo, todo el mundo se pone en matriz, como un hombre a la batalla,
contra ti, hija de Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{50:42} Jer 6,23}
\bibleverse{43} El rey de Babilonia ha oído las noticias de ellos, y sus
manos se vuelven débiles. La angustia se ha apoderado de él, dolores
como los de una mujer de parto. \bibleverse{44} He aquí que el enemigo
subirá como un leónde la espesura del Jordán contra la fuerte morada;
porque de repente haré que huyan de ella. Quienquiera que sea elegido,
Lo nombraré por encima, porque ¿quién es como yo? ¿Quién me designará
una hora? ¿Quién es el pastor que puede estar delante de mí?''
\footnote{\textbf{50:44} Jer 49,19-21} \bibleverse{45} Escucha, pues, el
consejo de Yahvéque ha tomado contra Babilonia; y sus propósitosque se
ha propuesto contra la tierra de los caldeos: Seguramente los
arrastrarán, incluso a los pequeños del rebaño. Seguramente hará que su
morada quede desolada sobre ellos. \bibleverse{46} La tierra tiembla por
el ruido de la toma de Babilonia. El grito se escucha entre las
naciones.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-fall-of-babylon-and-its-importance-for-the-long-suffering-jewish-people}{%
\subsection{The fall of Babylon and its importance for the
long-suffering Jewish
people}\label{the-fall-of-babylon-and-its-importance-for-the-long-suffering-jewish-people}}

\hypertarget{section-99}{%
\section{50}\label{section-99}}

\bibleverse{1} The word that Yahweh spoke concerning Babylon, concerning
the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet. \bibleverse{2}
``Declare among the nations and publish, and set up a standard; publish,
and don't conceal; say, `Babylon has been taken, Bel is disappointed,
Merodach is dismayed! Her images are disappointed. Her idols are
dismayed.' \bibleverse{3} For a nation comes up out of the north against
her, which will make her land desolate, and no one will dwell in it.
They have fled. They are gone, both man and animal. \bibleverse{4} ``In
those days, and in that time,'' says Yahweh, ``the children of Israel
will come, they and the children of Judah together; they will go on
their way weeping, and will seek Yahweh their God. \bibleverse{5} They
will inquire concerning Zion with their faces turned toward it, saying,
`Come, and join yourselves to Yahweh in an everlasting covenant that
will not be forgotten.' \bibleverse{6} My people have been lost sheep.
Their shepherds have caused them to go astray. They have turned them
away on the mountains. They have gone from mountain to hill. They have
forgotten their resting place. \bibleverse{7} All who found them have
devoured them. Their adversaries said, `We are not guilty, because they
have sinned against Yahweh, the habitation of righteousness, even
Yahweh, the hope of their fathers.' \bibleverse{8} ``Flee out of the
middle of Babylon! Go out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the
male goats before the flocks. \bibleverse{9} For, behold, I will stir up
and cause to come up against Babylon a company of great nations from the
north country; and they will set themselves in array against her. She
will be taken from there. Their arrows will be as of an expert mighty
man. None of them will return in vain. \bibleverse{10} Chaldea will be a
prey. All who prey on her will be satisfied,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{11} ``Because you are glad, because you rejoice, O you who
plunder my heritage, because you are wanton as a heifer that treads out
the grain, and neigh as strong horses, \bibleverse{12} your mother will
be utterly disappointed. She who bore you will be confounded. Behold,
she will be the least of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land, and a
desert. \bibleverse{13} Because of Yahweh's wrath she won't be
inhabited, but she will be wholly desolate. Everyone who goes by Babylon
will be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues. \bibleverse{14} Set
yourselves in array against Babylon all around, all you who bend the
bow; shoot at her. Spare no arrows, for she has sinned against Yahweh.
\bibleverse{15} Shout against her all around. She has submitted herself.
Her bulwarks have fallen. Her walls have been thrown down, for it is the
vengeance of Yahweh. Take vengeance on her. As she has done, do to her.
\bibleverse{16} Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him who handles the
sickle in the time of harvest. For fear of the oppressing sword, they
will each return to their own people, and they will each flee to their
own land.

\hypertarget{israels-earlier-disgrace-and-later-salvation}{%
\subsection{Israel's earlier disgrace and later
salvation}\label{israels-earlier-disgrace-and-later-salvation}}

\bibleverse{17} ``Israel is a hunted sheep. The lions have driven him
away. First, the king of Assyria devoured him, and now at last
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has broken his bones.'' \bibleverse{18}
Therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ``Behold, I will
punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of
Assyria. \bibleverse{19} I will bring Israel again to his pasture, and
he will feed on Carmel and Bashan. His soul will be satisfied on the
hills of Ephraim and in Gilead. \bibleverse{20} In those days, and in
that time,'' says Yahweh, ``the iniquity of Israel will be sought for,
and there will be none, also the sins of Judah, and they won't be found;
for I will pardon them whom I leave as a remnant.

\hypertarget{against-the-country-double-challenge}{%
\subsection{Against the country ``double
challenge''}\label{against-the-country-double-challenge}}

\bibleverse{21} ``Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it,
and against the inhabitants of Pekod. Kill and utterly destroy after
them,'' says Yahweh, ``and do according to all that I have commanded
you. \bibleverse{22} A sound of battle is in the land, and of great
destruction. \bibleverse{23} How the hammer of the whole earth is cut
apart and broken! How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations!
\bibleverse{24} I have laid a snare for you, and you are also taken,
Babylon, and you weren't aware. You are found, and also caught, because
you have fought against Yahweh. \bibleverse{25} Yahweh has opened his
armory, and has brought out the weapons of his indignation; for the
Lord, Yahweh of Armies, has a work to do in the land of the Chaldeans.
\bibleverse{26} Come against her from the farthest border. Open her
storehouses. Cast her up as heaps. Destroy her utterly. Let nothing of
her be left. \bibleverse{27} Kill all her bulls. Let them go down to the
slaughter. Woe to them! For their day has come, the time of their
visitation. \bibleverse{28} Listen to those who flee and escape out of
the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of Yahweh our God,
the vengeance of his temple. \bibleverse{29} ``Call together the archers
against Babylon, all those who bend the bow. Encamp against her all
around. Let none of it escape. Pay her back according to her work.
According to all that she has done, do to her; for she has been proud
against Yahweh, against the Holy One of Israel. \bibleverse{30}
Therefore her young men will fall in her streets. All her men of war
will be brought to silence in that day,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{31}
``Behold, I am against you, you proud one,'' says the Lord, Yahweh of
Armies; ``for your day has come, the time that I will visit you.
\bibleverse{32} The proud one will stumble and fall, and no one will
raise him up. I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it will devour all
who are around him.''

\hypertarget{annunciation-to-israel}{%
\subsection{Annunciation to Israel}\label{annunciation-to-israel}}

\bibleverse{33} Yahweh of Armies says: ``The children of Israel and the
children of Judah are oppressed together. All who took them captive hold
them fast. They refuse to let them go. \bibleverse{34} Their Redeemer is
strong. Yahweh of Armies is his name. He will thoroughly plead their
cause, that he may give rest to the earth, and disquiet the inhabitants
of Babylon.

\hypertarget{sword-saying}{%
\subsection{Sword Saying}\label{sword-saying}}

\bibleverse{35} ``A sword is on the Chaldeans,'' says Yahweh, ``and on
the inhabitants of Babylon, on her princes, and on her wise men.
\bibleverse{36} A sword is on the boasters, and they will become fools.
A sword is on her mighty men, and they will be dismayed. \bibleverse{37}
A sword is on their horses, on their chariots, and on all the mixed
people who are in the middle of her; and they will become as women. A
sword is on her treasures, and they will be robbed. \bibleverse{38} A
drought is on her waters, and they will be dried up; for it is a land of
engraved images, and they are mad over idols.

\hypertarget{various-additions-and-repeats}{%
\subsection{Various additions and
repeats}\label{various-additions-and-repeats}}

\bibleverse{39} Therefore the wild animals of the desert with the wolves
will dwell there. The ostriches will dwell therein. It will be inhabited
no more forever, neither will it be lived in from generation to
generation. \bibleverse{40} As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and
its neighbor cities,'' says Yahweh, ``so no man will dwell there,
neither will any son of man live therein. \bibleverse{41} ``Behold, a
people comes from the north. A great nation and many kings will be
stirred up from the uttermost parts of the earth. \bibleverse{42} They
take up bow and spear. They are cruel, and have no mercy. Their voice
roars like the sea. They ride on horses, everyone set in array, as a man
to the battle, against you, daughter of Babylon. \bibleverse{43} The
king of Babylon has heard the news of them, and his hands become feeble.
Anguish has taken hold of him, pains as of a woman in labor.
\bibleverse{44} Behold, the enemy will come up like a lion from the
thickets of the Jordan against the strong habitation; for I will
suddenly make them run away from it. Whoever is chosen, I will appoint
him over it, for who is like me? Who will appoint me a time? Who is the
shepherd who can stand before me?'' \bibleverse{45} Therefore hear the
counsel of Yahweh that he has taken against Babylon; and his purposes
that he has purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely they will
drag them away, even the little ones of the flock. Surely he will make
their habitation desolate over them. \bibleverse{46} The earth trembles
at the noise of the taking of Babylon. The cry is heard among the
nations.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-juicio-de-babilonia-ha-sido-decidido}{%
\subsection{El juicio de Babilonia ha sido
decidido}\label{el-juicio-de-babilonia-ha-sido-decidido}}

\hypertarget{section-100}{%
\section{51}\label{section-100}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahvé dice: ``He aquí que yo me levantaré contra
Babilonia, y contra los que habitan en Lebkamai, un viento destructor.
\bibleverse{2} Enviaré a Babilonia extraños que la aventarán. Vaciarán
su tierra; porque en el día de la angustia estarán contra ella todos.
\footnote{\textbf{51:2} Jer 15,7} \bibleverse{3} Contra el que se dobla,
que el arquero doble su arco, también contra el que se levanta con su
cota de malla. ¡No le perdonen los jóvenes! ¡Destruyan por completo a
todo su ejército! \bibleverse{4} Caerán muertos en la tierra de los
caldeos, y se empuja a través de sus calles. \bibleverse{5} Porque
Israel no está abandonado, ni Judá, por su Dios, por Yahvé de los
Ejércitos; aunque su tierra está llena de culpa contra el Santo de
Israel. \footnote{\textbf{51:5} Is 54,4; Jer 50,11; Jer 50,29}
\bibleverse{6} ``¡Huye de en medio de Babilonia! ¡Todo el mundo salva su
propia vida! No seas cortado en su iniquidad, porque es el tiempo de la
venganza de Yahvé. Él le dará una recompensa. \footnote{\textbf{51:6}
  Jer 50,8; Apoc 18,4; Is 48,20}

\hypertarget{babilonia-el-vaso-de-dios-la-sentencia-de-muerte-para-babilonia}{%
\subsection{Babilonia el vaso de Dios: la sentencia de muerte para
Babilonia}\label{babilonia-el-vaso-de-dios-la-sentencia-de-muerte-para-babilonia}}

\bibleverse{7} Babilonia ha sido una copa de oro en la mano de Yahvé,
que emborrachó a toda la tierra. Las naciones han bebido de su vino; por
eso las naciones se han vuelto locas. \footnote{\textbf{51:7} Jer 25,15;
  Apoc 17,4; Apoc 18,3} \bibleverse{8} ¡Babilonia ha caído
repentinamente y ha sido destruida! ¡Llora por ella! Toma un bálsamo
para su dolor. Tal vez pueda curarse. \footnote{\textbf{51:8} Apoc 18,2}
\bibleverse{9} ``Habríamos curado a Babilonia, pero no está curada.
Abandónala, y que cada uno se vaya a su país; pues su juicio llega hasta
el cielo, y se eleva hasta los cielos. \bibleverse{10} `Yahvé ha
producido nuestra justicia. Venid y anunciemos en Sión la obra de Yahvé,
nuestro Dios'.

\hypertarget{la-ciudad-es-asaltada-por-la-decisiuxf3n-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La ciudad es asaltada por la decisión de
Dios}\label{la-ciudad-es-asaltada-por-la-decisiuxf3n-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{11} ``¡Que las flechas estén afiladas! ¡Sujeta los escudos
con firmeza! Yahvé ha agitado el espíritu de los reyes de los medos,
porque su propósito es contra Babilonia, para destruirla; porque es la
venganza de Yahvé, la venganza de su templo. \footnote{\textbf{51:11} Is
  13,17; Jer 50,28} \bibleverse{12} ¡Levanten un estandarte contra los
muros de Babilonia! ¡Haz que el reloj sea fuerte! Poner a los
vigilantes, y preparar las emboscadas; porque Yahvé se ha propuesto y ha
hecholo que dijo sobre los habitantes de Babilonia. \bibleverse{13} Tú
que habitas sobre muchas aguas, abundante en tesoros, ha llegado tu fin,
la medida de tu codicia. \footnote{\textbf{51:13} Apoc 17,1}
\bibleverse{14} Yahvé de los Ejércitos ha jurado por sí mismo,
diciendo,`Seguramente te llenaré de hombres, como con las langostas, y
levantarán un grito contra ti'.

\hypertarget{alabado-sea-el-seuxf1or-dios-de-israel}{%
\subsection{Alabado sea el Señor, Dios de
Israel}\label{alabado-sea-el-seuxf1or-dios-de-israel}}

\bibleverse{15} ``Él ha hecho la tierra con su poder. Él ha establecido
el mundo por su sabiduría. Con su entendimiento ha extendido los cielos.
\footnote{\textbf{51:15} Jer 10,12-16} \bibleverse{16} Cuando él emite
su voz, hay un rugido de aguas en los cielos, y hace que los vapores
asciendan desde los confines de la tierra. Hace relámpagos para la
lluvia, y saca el viento de sus arcas. \bibleverse{17} ``Todo hombre se
ha vuelto estúpido y sin conocimiento. Todo orfebre se siente
decepcionado por su imagen, porque sus imágenes fundidas son falsas, y
no hay aliento en ellos. \bibleverse{18} Son vanidad, una obra de
ilusión. En el tiempo de su visita, perecerán. \bibleverse{19} La
porción de Jacob no es como éstas, porque él formó todas las cosas,
incluyendo la tribu de su herencia. Yavé de los Ejércitos es su nombre.

\hypertarget{martillo-diciendo-el-juicio-de-babilonia-en-su-significado-histuxf3rico-mundial}{%
\subsection{Martillo diciendo; el juicio de Babilonia en su significado
histórico
mundial}\label{martillo-diciendo-el-juicio-de-babilonia-en-su-significado-histuxf3rico-mundial}}

\bibleverse{20} ``Vosotros sois mi hacha de combate y mis armas de
guerra. Contigo romperé las naciones en pedazos. Con ustedes destruiré
reinos. \footnote{\textbf{51:20} Jer 50,23; Is 10,5} \bibleverse{21}
Contigo romperé en pedazosel caballo y su jinete. \bibleverse{22}
Contigo romperé en pedazosel carro y el que va en él. Contigo me romperé
en pedazoshombre y mujer. Contigo me romperé en pedazosel viejo y el
joven. Contigo me romperé en pedazosel joven y la virgen.
\bibleverse{23} Contigo romperé en pedazosel pastor y su rebaño. Contigo
me romperé en pedazosel agricultor y su yugo. Contigo me romperé en
pedazosgobernadores y diputados.

\bibleverse{24} ``Le devolveré a Babilonia y a todos los habitantes de
Caldea todo el mal que han hecho en Sión a tus ojos'', dice el Señor.
\footnote{\textbf{51:24} Jer 50,29} \bibleverse{25} ``He aquí que estoy
contra ti, montaña destructora'', dice Yahvé, ``que destruye toda la
tierra. Extiendo mi mano sobre ti, te bajan de las rocas, y te
convertirá en una montaña quemada. \bibleverse{26} No te quitarán una
piedra angular, ni una piedra para los cimientos; pero tú estarás
desolado para siempre'', dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{descripciuxf3n-de-la-conquista-de-la-ciudad}{%
\subsection{Descripción de la conquista de la
ciudad}\label{descripciuxf3n-de-la-conquista-de-la-ciudad}}

\bibleverse{27} ``¡Poned un estandarte en la tierra! ¡Toca la trompeta
entre las naciones! ¡Preparen a las naciones contra ella! ¡Convoca
contra ella a los reinos de Ararat, Minni y Ashkenaz! ¡Nombrar a un
mariscal contra ella! ¡Haz que los caballos suban como las langostas
enjambre! \footnote{\textbf{51:27} Is 13,3; Gén 10,3} \bibleverse{28}
Prepara contra ella a las naciones, ¡los reyes de los medos, sus
gobernadores, y todos sus diputados, y toda la tierra de su dominio!
\bibleverse{29} La tierra tiembla y sufre; para los propósitos de Yahvé
contra Babilonia se mantienen, para convertir la tierra de Babilonia en
una desolación, sin habitantes. \bibleverse{30} Los poderosos de
Babilonia han dejado de luchar, permanecen en sus fortalezas. Su poderío
ha fracasado. Se han convertido en mujeres. Sus moradas son incendiadas.
Sus barras están rotas. \bibleverse{31} Un corredor correrá al encuentro
de otro, y un mensajero para encontrarse con otro, para mostrar al rey
de Babilonia que su ciudad está tomada por todos los lados.
\bibleverse{32} Así que los pasajes se apoderan. Han quemado las cañas
con fuego. Los hombres de guerra están asustados''.

\bibleverse{33} Porque Yahvé de los Ejércitos, el Dios de Israel dice:
``La hija de Babilonia es como una era en el momento en que se pisa.
Todavía un poco, y el tiempo de la cosecha viene para ella''.

\hypertarget{la-deuda-de-babilonia-con-jerusaluxe9n-y-la-venganza-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La deuda de Babilonia con Jerusalén y la venganza de
Dios}\label{la-deuda-de-babilonia-con-jerusaluxe9n-y-la-venganza-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{34} ``Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, me ha devorado. Me ha
aplastado. Me ha convertido en un recipiente vacío. Él, como un
monstruo, me ha tragado. Se ha llenado la boca con mis delicias. Me ha
expulsado. \bibleverse{35} ¡Que la violencia hecha a mí y a mi carne sea
sobre Babilonia!''el habitante de Sion dirá; y, ``¡Que mi sangre sea
sobre los habitantes de Caldea!''dirá Jerusalén.

\bibleverse{36} Por eso dice Yahvé: ``He aquí que yo defenderé tu causa,
y me vengaré por ti. Secaré su mar, y hacer que su fuente se seque.
\bibleverse{37} Babilonia se convertirá en un montón, una morada para
los chacales, un asombro, y un silbido, sin habitante. \footnote{\textbf{51:37}
  Jer 50,13} \bibleverse{38} Rugirán juntos como leones jóvenes.
Gruñirán como cachorros de león. \bibleverse{39} Cuando se inflamen,
haré su fiesta, y los emborracharé, para que se alegren, y dormir un
sueño perpetuo, y no despertar'', dice Yahvé. \bibleverse{40} ``Los haré
caer como corderos al matadero, como los carneros con los machos
cabríos.

\hypertarget{lamento-por-la-cauxedda-de-la-ciudad-combinada-con-advertencias-a-israel}{%
\subsection{Lamento por la caída de la ciudad combinada con advertencias
a
Israel}\label{lamento-por-la-cauxedda-de-la-ciudad-combinada-con-advertencias-a-israel}}

\bibleverse{41} ``¡Cómo se lleva a Sheshach! ¡Cómo se apodera la
alabanza de toda la tierra! ¡Cómo se ha convertido Babilonia en una
desolación entre las naciones! \bibleverse{42} El mar ha subido sobre
Babilonia. Está cubierta por la multitud de sus olas. \bibleverse{43}
Sus ciudades se han convertido en una desolación, una tierra seca, y un
desierto, una tierra en la que no habita ningún hombre. Ningún hijo de
hombre pasa por ella. \bibleverse{44} Ejecutaré el juicio sobre Bel en
Babilonia, y sacaré de su boca lo que se ha tragado. Las naciones no
fluirán más hacia él. Sí, el muro de Babilonia caerá. \footnote{\textbf{51:44}
  Jer 50,2} \bibleverse{45} ``Pueblo mío, aléjate de en medio de ella, y
cada uno de ustedes se salve de la feroz ira de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{51:45}
  Jer 51,6} \bibleverse{46} No dejes que tu corazón desfallezca. No
temas por las noticias que se escucharán en la tierra. Para las noticias
vendrá un año, y después de eso en otro año vendrán las noticias, y la
violencia en la tierra, gobernante contra gobernante. \bibleverse{47}
Por tanto, he aquí que vienen días en que ejecutaré el juicio sobre las
imágenes grabadas de Babilonia; y toda su tierra será confundida. Todos
sus muertos caerán en medio de ella. \bibleverse{48} Entonces los cielos
y la tierra, y todo lo que hay en ella, cantará de alegría sobre
Babilonia; porque los destructores vendrán a ella desde el norte'', dice
Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{51:48} Apoc 18,20} \bibleverse{49} ``Como
Babilonia ha hecho caer a los muertos de Israel, así que los muertos de
toda la tierra caerán en Babilonia. \bibleverse{50} Tú que has escapado
de la espada, ¡ve! ¡No te quedes quieto! Recuerda a Yahvé desde lejos, y
deja que Jerusalén entre en tu mente''. \footnote{\textbf{51:50} Sal
  137,5} \bibleverse{51} ``Estamos confundidosporque hemos escuchado
reproches. La confusión ha cubierto nuestros rostros, porque han entrado
extraños en los santuarios de la casa de Yahvé''. \bibleverse{52} ``Por
lo tanto, he aquí que vienen los días'', dice Yahvé, ``que ejecutaré el
juicio sobre sus imágenes grabadas; y por toda su tierra gemirán los
heridos. \bibleverse{53} Aunque Babilonia se eleve hasta el cielo, y
aunque deba fortificar la altura de su fuerza, pero vendrán a ella
destructores de mi parte'', dice Yahvé.

\hypertarget{conclusiuxf3n-y-revisiuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Conclusión y revisión}\label{conclusiuxf3n-y-revisiuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{54} ``El sonido de un grito viene de Babilonia, ¡y de gran
destrucción de la tierra de los caldeos! \bibleverse{55} Porque Yahvé
arrasa con Babilonia, ¡y destruye de ella la gran voz! Sus olas rugen
como muchas aguas. El ruido de su voz es pronunciado. \bibleverse{56}
Porque el destructor ha venido sobre ella, incluso en Babilonia. Sus
poderosos hombres han sido tomados. Sus arcos están rotos en pedazos,
porque Yahvé es un Dios de retribución. Seguramente lo pagará.
\footnote{\textbf{51:56} Deut 32,35} \bibleverse{57} Haré de ella
príncipes y sabios, sus gobernantes, sus diputados y sus poderosos
hombres borrachos. Dormirán un sueño perpetuo, y no despertar,''dice el
Rey, cuyo nombre es Yahvé de los Ejércitos. \footnote{\textbf{51:57} Jer
  51,39}

\bibleverse{58} El Señor de los Ejércitos dice: ``Los anchos muros de
Babilonia serán completamente derribados. Sus altas puertas serán
quemadas con fuego. Los pueblos trabajarán por la vanidad, y las
naciones para el fuego; y se cansarán''. \footnote{\textbf{51:58} Hab
  2,13}

\hypertarget{la-maldiciuxf3n-sobre-babilonia-es-hundida-en-el-uxe9ufrates-por-seraja-en-nombre-de-jeremuxedas}{%
\subsection{La maldición sobre Babilonia es hundida en el Éufrates por
Seraja en nombre de
Jeremías}\label{la-maldiciuxf3n-sobre-babilonia-es-hundida-en-el-uxe9ufrates-por-seraja-en-nombre-de-jeremuxedas}}

\bibleverse{59} Palabra que el profeta Jeremías ordenó a Seraías, hijo
de Nerías, hijo de Maseías, cuando fue con Sedequías, rey de Judá, a
Babilonia, en el cuarto año de su reinado. Seraías era jefe de
intendencia. \footnote{\textbf{51:59} Jer 36,4} \bibleverse{60} Jeremías
escribió en un libro todos los males que vendrían sobre Babilonia, y
todas estas palabras que están escritas sobre Babilonia. \bibleverse{61}
Jeremías dijo a Seraías: ``Cuando llegues a Babilonia, procura leer
todas estas palabras, \bibleverse{62} y di: `Señor, tú has hablado sobre
este lugar, para cortarlo, para que nadie habite en él, ni hombre ni
animal, sino que sea desolado para siempre'. \bibleverse{63} Cuando
termines de leer este libro, atarás una piedra y la arrojarás en medio
del Éufrates. \footnote{\textbf{51:63} Apoc 18,21} \bibleverse{64}
Entonces dirás: `Así se hundirá Babilonia y no volverá a levantarse a
causa del mal que le haré pasar; y se cansarán'.'' Hasta aquí las
palabras de Jeremías.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-judgment-of-babylon-has-been-decided}{%
\subsection{The judgment of Babylon has been
decided}\label{the-judgment-of-babylon-has-been-decided}}

\hypertarget{section-101}{%
\section{51}\label{section-101}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh says: ``Behold, I will raise up against Babylon,
and against those who dwell in Lebkamai, a destroying wind.
\bibleverse{2} I will send to Babylon strangers, who will winnow her.
They will empty her land; for in the day of trouble they will be against
her all around. \bibleverse{3} Against him who bends, let the archer
bend his bow, also against him who lifts himself up in his coat of mail.
Don't spare her young men! Utterly destroy all her army! \bibleverse{4}
They will fall down slain in the land of the Chaldeans, and thrust
through in her streets. \bibleverse{5} For Israel is not forsaken, nor
Judah, by his God, by Yahweh of Armies; though their land is full of
guilt against the Holy One of Israel. \bibleverse{6} ``Flee out of the
middle of Babylon! Everyone save his own life! Don't be cut off in her
iniquity, for it is the time of Yahweh's vengeance. He will render to
her a recompense.

\hypertarget{babylon-the-vessel-of-god-the-death-sentence-for-babylon}{%
\subsection{Babylon the vessel of God: the death sentence for
Babylon}\label{babylon-the-vessel-of-god-the-death-sentence-for-babylon}}

\bibleverse{7} Babylon has been a golden cup in Yahweh's hand, who made
all the earth drunk. The nations have drunk of her wine; therefore the
nations have gone mad. \bibleverse{8} Babylon has suddenly fallen and
been destroyed! Wail for her! Take balm for her pain. Perhaps she may be
healed. \bibleverse{9} ``We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed. Forsake her, and let's each go into his own country; for her
judgment reaches to heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.
\bibleverse{10} `Yahweh has produced our righteousness. Come, and let's
declare in Zion the work of Yahweh our God.'

\hypertarget{the-city-is-assaulted-by-gods-decision}{%
\subsection{The city is assaulted by God's
decision}\label{the-city-is-assaulted-by-gods-decision}}

\bibleverse{11} ``Make the arrows sharp! Hold the shields firmly! Yahweh
has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes, because his purpose
is against Babylon, to destroy it; for it is the vengeance of Yahweh,
the vengeance of his temple. \bibleverse{12} Set up a standard against
the walls of Babylon! Make the watch strong! Set the watchmen, and
prepare the ambushes; for Yahweh has both purposed and done that which
he spoke concerning the inhabitants of Babylon. \bibleverse{13} You who
dwell on many waters, abundant in treasures, your end has come, the
measure of your covetousness. \bibleverse{14} Yahweh of Armies has sworn
by himself, saying, `Surely I will fill you with men, as with locusts,
and they will lift up a shout against you.'

\hypertarget{praise-the-lord-god-of-israel}{%
\subsection{Praise the Lord, God of
Israel}\label{praise-the-lord-god-of-israel}}

\bibleverse{15} ``He has made the earth by his power. He has established
the world by his wisdom. By his understanding he has stretched out the
heavens. \bibleverse{16} When he utters his voice, there is a roar of
waters in the heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends
of the earth. He makes lightning for the rain, and brings the wind out
of his treasuries. \bibleverse{17} ``Every man has become stupid and
without knowledge. Every goldsmith is disappointed by his image, for his
molten images are falsehood, and there is no breath in them.
\bibleverse{18} They are vanity, a work of delusion. In the time of
their visitation, they will perish. \bibleverse{19} The portion of Jacob
is not like these, for he formed all things, including the tribe of his
inheritance. Yahweh of Armies is his name.

\hypertarget{hammer-saying-the-judgment-of-babylon-in-its-world-historical-significance}{%
\subsection{Hammer saying; the judgment of Babylon in its world
historical
significance}\label{hammer-saying-the-judgment-of-babylon-in-its-world-historical-significance}}

\bibleverse{20} ``You are my battle ax and weapons of war. With you I
will break the nations into pieces. With you I will destroy kingdoms.
\bibleverse{21} With you I will break in pieces the horse and his rider.
\bibleverse{22} With you I will break in pieces the chariot and him who
rides therein. With you I will break in pieces man and woman. With you I
will break in pieces the old man and the youth. With you I will break in
pieces the young man and the virgin. \bibleverse{23} With you I will
break in pieces the shepherd and his flock. With you I will break in
pieces the farmer and his yoke. With you I will break in pieces
governors and deputies. \bibleverse{24} ``I will render to Babylon and
to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in
Zion in your sight,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{25} ``Behold, I am
against you, destroying mountain,'' says Yahweh, ``which destroys all
the earth. I will stretch out my hand on you, roll you down from the
rocks, and will make you a burned mountain. \bibleverse{26} They won't
take a cornerstone from you, nor a stone for foundations; but you will
be desolate forever,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{city-conquest-description}{%
\subsection{City Conquest Description}\label{city-conquest-description}}

\bibleverse{27} ``Set up a standard in the land! Blow the trumpet among
the nations! Prepare the nations against her! Call together against her
the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz! Appoint a marshal against
her! Cause the horses to come up as the swarming locusts!
\bibleverse{28} Prepare against her the nations, the kings of the Medes,
its governors, and all its deputies, and all the land of their dominion!
\bibleverse{29} The land trembles and is in pain; for the purposes of
Yahweh against Babylon stand, to make the land of Babylon a desolation,
without inhabitant. \bibleverse{30} The mighty men of Babylon have
stopped fighting, they remain in their strongholds. Their might has
failed. They have become as women. Her dwelling places are set on fire.
Her bars are broken. \bibleverse{31} One runner will run to meet
another, and one messenger to meet another, to show the king of Babylon
that his city is taken on every quarter. \bibleverse{32} So the passages
are seized. They have burned the reeds with fire. The men of war are
frightened.'' \bibleverse{33} For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel
says: ``The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor at the time
when it is trodden. Yet a little while, and the time of harvest comes
for her.''

\hypertarget{babylons-debt-to-jerusalem-and-gods-revenge}{%
\subsection{Babylon's debt to Jerusalem and God's
revenge}\label{babylons-debt-to-jerusalem-and-gods-revenge}}

\bibleverse{34} ``Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon has devoured me. He
has crushed me. He has made me an empty vessel. He has, like a monster,
swallowed me up. He has filled his mouth with my delicacies. He has cast
me out. \bibleverse{35} May the violence done to me and to my flesh be
on Babylon!'' the inhabitant of Zion will say; and, ``May my blood be on
the inhabitants of Chaldea!'' will Jerusalem say. \bibleverse{36}
Therefore Yahweh says: ``Behold, I will plead your cause, and take
vengeance for you. I will dry up her sea, and make her fountain dry.
\bibleverse{37} Babylon will become heaps, a dwelling place for jackals,
an astonishment, and a hissing, without inhabitant. \bibleverse{38} They
will roar together like young lions. They will growl as lions' cubs.
\bibleverse{39} When they are inflamed, I will make their feast, and I
will make them drunk, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual
sleep, and not wake up,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{40} ``I will bring
them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with male goats.

\hypertarget{lament-over-the-fall-of-the-city-combined-with-warnings-to-israel}{%
\subsection{Lament over the fall of the city combined with warnings to
Israel}\label{lament-over-the-fall-of-the-city-combined-with-warnings-to-israel}}

\bibleverse{41} ``How Sheshach is taken! How the praise of the whole
earth is seized! How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations!
\bibleverse{42} The sea has come up on Babylon. She is covered with the
multitude of its waves. \bibleverse{43} Her cities have become a
desolation, a dry land, and a desert, a land in which no man dwells. No
son of man passes by it. \bibleverse{44} I will execute judgment on Bel
in Babylon, and I will bring out of his mouth that which he has
swallowed up. The nations will not flow any more to him. Yes, the wall
of Babylon will fall. \bibleverse{45} ``My people, go away from the
middle of her, and each of you save yourselves from Yahweh's fierce
anger. \bibleverse{46} Don't let your heart faint. Don't fear for the
news that will be heard in the land. For news will come one year, and
after that in another year news will come, and violence in the land,
ruler against ruler. \bibleverse{47} Therefore behold, the days come
that I will execute judgment on the engraved images of Babylon; and her
whole land will be confounded. All her slain will fall in the middle of
her. \bibleverse{48} Then the heavens and the earth, and all that is
therein, will sing for joy over Babylon; for the destroyers will come to
her from the north,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{49} ``As Babylon has
caused the slain of Israel to fall, so the slain of all the land will
fall at Babylon. \bibleverse{50} You who have escaped the sword, go!
Don't stand still! Remember Yahweh from afar, and let Jerusalem come
into your mind.'' \bibleverse{51} ``We are confounded because we have
heard reproach. Confusion has covered our faces, for strangers have come
into the sanctuaries of Yahweh's house.'' \bibleverse{52} ``Therefore
behold, the days come,'' says Yahweh, ``that I will execute judgment on
her engraved images; and through all her land the wounded will groan.
\bibleverse{53} Though Babylon should mount up to the sky, and though
she should fortify the height of her strength, yet destroyers will come
to her from me,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{conclusion-and-review}{%
\subsection{Conclusion and review}\label{conclusion-and-review}}

\bibleverse{54} ``The sound of a cry comes from Babylon, and of great
destruction from the land of the Chaldeans! \bibleverse{55} For Yahweh
lays Babylon waste, and destroys out of her the great voice! Their waves
roar like many waters. The noise of their voice is uttered.
\bibleverse{56} For the destroyer has come on her, even on Babylon. Her
mighty men are taken. Their bows are broken in pieces, for Yahweh is a
God of retribution. He will surely repay. \bibleverse{57} I will make
her princes, her wise men, her governors, her deputies, and her mighty
men drunk. They will sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake up,'' says
the King, whose name is Yahweh of Armies. \bibleverse{58} Yahweh of
Armies says: ``The wide walls of Babylon will be utterly overthrown. Her
high gates will be burned with fire. The peoples will labor for vanity,
and the nations for the fire; and they will be weary.''

\hypertarget{the-curse-on-babylon-is-sunk-in-the-euphrates-by-seraja-in-the-name-of-jeremiah}{%
\subsection{The curse on Babylon is sunk in the Euphrates by Seraja in
the name of
Jeremiah}\label{the-curse-on-babylon-is-sunk-in-the-euphrates-by-seraja-in-the-name-of-jeremiah}}

\bibleverse{59} The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah
the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the
king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. Now Seraiah
was chief quartermaster. \bibleverse{60} Jeremiah wrote in a book all
the evil that should come on Babylon, even all these words that are
written concerning Babylon. \bibleverse{61} Jeremiah said to Seraiah,
``When you come to Babylon, then see that you read all these words,
\bibleverse{62} and say, `Yahweh, you have spoken concerning this place,
to cut it off, that no one will dwell in it, neither man nor animal, but
that it will be desolate forever.' \bibleverse{63} It will be, when you
have finished reading this book, that you shall bind a stone to it, and
cast it into the middle of the Euphrates. \bibleverse{64} Then you shall
say, `Thus will Babylon sink, and will not rise again because of the
evil that I will bring on her; and they will be weary.'\,'' Thus far are
the words of Jeremiah.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-desolaciuxf3n-de-sedequuxedas-el-sitio-de-jerusaluxe9n-escape-y-captura-del-rey-juzgado-penal-de-ribla}{%
\subsection{La desolación de Sedequías; El sitio de Jerusalén; Escape y
captura del rey; Juzgado penal de
Ribla}\label{la-desolaciuxf3n-de-sedequuxedas-el-sitio-de-jerusaluxe9n-escape-y-captura-del-rey-juzgado-penal-de-ribla}}

\hypertarget{section-102}{%
\section{52}\label{section-102}}

\bibleverse{1} Sedequías tenía veintiún años cuando comenzó a reinar.
Reinó once años en Jerusalén. Su madre se llamaba Hamutal, hija de
Jeremías de Libna. \footnote{\textbf{52:1} Jer 39,1-10; 2Re 24,18-25;
  2Cró 36,11-21} \bibleverse{2} Hizo lo que era malo a los ojos de Yavé,
según todo lo que había hecho Joacim. \bibleverse{3} Porque por la ira
de Yavé sucedió esto en Jerusalén y en Judá, hasta que los expulsó de su
presencia. Sedequías se rebeló contra el rey de Babilonia.
\bibleverse{4} En el noveno año de su reinado, en el décimo mes, a los
diez días del mes, vino Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, él y todo su
ejército, contra Jerusalén, y acamparon contra ella; y construyeron
contra ella fortalezas alrededor. \bibleverse{5} Así fue sitiada la
ciudad hasta el año undécimo del rey Sedequías.

\bibleverse{6} En el cuarto mes, a los nueve días del mes, el hambre fue
grave en la ciudad, de modo que no hubo pan para el pueblo de la tierra.
\bibleverse{7} Entonces se abrió una brecha en la ciudad, y todos los
hombres de guerra huyeron y salieron de la ciudad de noche por el camino
de la puerta entre los dos muros, que estaba junto al jardín del rey.
Los caldeos estaban contra la ciudad por todas partes. Los hombres de
guerra se dirigieron hacia el Arabá, \bibleverse{8} pero el ejército de
los caldeos persiguió al rey y alcanzó a Sedequías en las llanuras de
Jericó, y todo su ejército se dispersó de él. \bibleverse{9} Entonces
tomaron al rey y lo llevaron ante el rey de Babilonia a Ribla, en la
tierra de Hamat, y éste pronunció un juicio sobre él. \bibleverse{10} El
rey de Babilonia mató a los hijos de Sedequías ante sus ojos. También
mató a todos los príncipes de Judá en Ribla. \bibleverse{11} Le sacó los
ojos a Sedequías, y el rey de Babilonia lo ató con grilletes, lo llevó a
Babilonia y lo puso en prisión hasta el día de su muerte. \footnote{\textbf{52:11}
  Jer 32,5}

\hypertarget{conquista-y-destrucciuxf3n-de-la-ciudad-saqueo-e-incendio-del-templo-traslado-de-habitantes-a-babilonia-ejecuciones-en-ribla}{%
\subsection{Conquista y destrucción de la ciudad; Saqueo e incendio del
templo; Traslado de habitantes a Babilonia; Ejecuciones en
Ribla}\label{conquista-y-destrucciuxf3n-de-la-ciudad-saqueo-e-incendio-del-templo-traslado-de-habitantes-a-babilonia-ejecuciones-en-ribla}}

\bibleverse{12} En el mes quinto, a los diez días del mes, que era el
año decimonoveno del rey Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, entró en
Jerusalén Nabuzaradán, capitán de la guardia, que estaba delante del rey
de Babilonia. \bibleverse{13} Quemó la casa de Yahvé y la casa del rey,
y quemó todas las casas de Jerusalén, todas las casas grandes.
\bibleverse{14} Todo el ejército de los caldeos, que estaba con el
capitán de la guardia, derribó todos los muros de Jerusalén por todas
partes. \bibleverse{15} Entonces Nabuzaradán, el capitán de la guardia,
se llevó cautivos a los más pobres del pueblo y al resto de la gente que
había quedado en la ciudad, y a los que habían desertado, que se habían
pasado al rey de Babilonia, y al resto de la multitud. \bibleverse{16}
Pero Nabuzaradán, el capitán de la guardia, dejó a los más pobres de la
tierra para que fueran viñadores y agricultores.

\bibleverse{17} Los caldeos rompieron en pedazos las columnas de bronce
que había en la casa de Yavé y las bases y el mar de bronce que había en
la casa de Yavé, y se llevaron todo su bronce a Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{52:17}
  Jer 27,19-22} \bibleverse{18} También se llevaron las ollas, las
palas, los apagadores, las palanganas, las cucharas y todos los
recipientes de bronce con los que servían. \bibleverse{19} El capitán de
la guardia se llevó las copas, los braseros, las palanganas, las ollas,
los candiles, las cucharas y los cuencos; lo que era de oro, como oro, y
lo que era de plata, como plata.

\bibleverse{20} Tomaron las dos columnas, el mar único y los doce toros
de bronce que estaban debajo de las bases, que el rey Salomón había
hecho para la casa de Yahvé. El bronce de todos estos recipientes no
tenía peso. \footnote{\textbf{52:20} 1Re 7,15-47} \bibleverse{21} En
cuanto a las columnas, la altura de la única columna era de dieciocho
codos;\footnote{\textbf{52:21} Un codo es la longitud desde la punta del
  dedo corazón hasta el codo del brazo de un hombre, es decir, unas 18
  pulgadas o 46 centímetros.} y una línea de doce codos la rodeaba, y su
grosor era de cuatro dedos. Era hueca. \bibleverse{22} Sobre ella había
un capitel de bronce de cinco codos de altura,\footnote{\textbf{52:22}
  Un codo es la longitud desde la punta del dedo corazón hasta el codo
  del brazo de un hombre, es decir, unas 18 pulgadas o 46 centímetros.}
con red y granadas en el capitel alrededor, todo de bronce. La segunda
columna también tenía lo mismo, con granadas. \bibleverse{23} Había
noventa y seis granadas a los lados; todas las granadas eran cien en la
red alrededor.

\bibleverse{24} El capitán de la guardia tomó a Seraías, el sumo
sacerdote, y a Sofonías, el segundo sacerdote, y a los tres guardianes
del umbral, \footnote{\textbf{52:24} 1Cró 6,14} \bibleverse{25} y de la
ciudad tomó a un oficial que estaba al frente de los hombres de guerra,
y a siete hombres de los que vieron la cara del rey, que se encontraban
en la ciudad, y al escriba del capitán del ejército, que reunía al
pueblo del país, y a sesenta hombres del pueblo del país, que se
encontraban en medio de la ciudad. \bibleverse{26} Nabuzaradán, capitán
de la guardia, los tomó y los llevó al rey de Babilonia, a Ribla.
\bibleverse{27} El rey de Babilonia los golpeó y los mató en Ribla, en
la tierra de Hamat. Y Judá fue llevado cautivo de su tierra.

\hypertarget{los-nuxfameros-de-los-que-se-llevaron}{%
\subsection{Los números de los que se
llevaron}\label{los-nuxfameros-de-los-que-se-llevaron}}

\bibleverse{28} Este es el número del pueblo que Nabucodonosor llevó
cautivo: en el séptimo año, tres mil veintitrés judíos; \footnote{\textbf{52:28}
  2Re 24,11-16} \bibleverse{29} en el año dieciocho de Nabucodonosor,
llevó cautivas de Jerusalén a ochocientas treinta y dos personas;
\bibleverse{30} en el año veintitrés de Nabucodonosor, Nabuzaradán,
capitán de la guardia, llevó cautivas a setecientas cuarenta y cinco
personas de los judíos. Todo el pueblo era de cuatro mil seiscientos.

\hypertarget{jojachuxedn-indultado-tras-treinta-y-siete-auxf1os-de-prisiuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Jojachín indultado tras treinta y siete años de
prisión}\label{jojachuxedn-indultado-tras-treinta-y-siete-auxf1os-de-prisiuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{31} En el año treinta y siete del cautiverio de Joaquín, rey
de Judá, en el mes duodécimo, a los veinticinco días del mes,
Evilmerodac, rey de Babilonia, en el primer año de su reinado, levantó
la cabeza de Joaquín, rey de Judá, y lo liberó de la prisión.
\bibleverse{32} Le habló con amabilidad y puso su trono por encima del
trono de los reyes que estaban con él en Babilonia, \bibleverse{33} y le
cambió las ropas de la prisión. Joaquín comió pan delante de él
continuamente todos los días de su vida. \bibleverse{34} En cuanto a su
pensión, el rey de Babilonia le daba continuamente una ración hasta el
día de su muerte, todos los días de su vida. \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-desolation-of-zedekiah-the-siege-of-jerusalem-escape-and-capture-of-the-king-ribla-criminal-court}{%
\subsection{The desolation of Zedekiah; The Siege of Jerusalem; Escape
and capture of the king; Ribla criminal
court}\label{the-desolation-of-zedekiah-the-siege-of-jerusalem-escape-and-capture-of-the-king-ribla-criminal-court}}

\hypertarget{section-103}{%
\section{52}\label{section-103}}

\bibleverse{1} Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign.
He reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Hamutal the
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. \bibleverse{2} He did that which was
evil in Yahweh's sight, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
\bibleverse{3} For through Yahweh's anger this happened in Jerusalem and
Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence. Zedekiah rebelled
against the king of Babylon. \bibleverse{4} In the ninth year of his
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and
encamped against it; and they built forts against it round about.
\bibleverse{5} So the city was besieged to the eleventh year of King
Zedekiah. \bibleverse{6} In the fourth month, in the ninth day of the
month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for
the people of the land. \bibleverse{7} Then a breach was made in the
city, and all the men of war fled, and went out of the city by night by
the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's
garden. Now the Chaldeans were against the city all around. The men of
war went toward the Arabah, \bibleverse{8} but the army of the Chaldeans
pursued the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and
all his army was scattered from him. \bibleverse{9} Then they took the
king, and carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of
Hamath; and he pronounced judgment on him. \bibleverse{10} The king of
Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. He also killed all
the princes of Judah in Riblah. \bibleverse{11} He put out the eyes of
Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in fetters, and carried him
to Babylon, and put him in prison until the day of his death.

\hypertarget{conquest-and-destruction-of-the-city-looting-and-burning-of-the-temple-transfer-of-inhabitants-to-babylon-executions-in-ribla}{%
\subsection{Conquest and destruction of the city; Looting and burning of
the temple; Transfer of inhabitants to Babylon; Executions in
Ribla}\label{conquest-and-destruction-of-the-city-looting-and-burning-of-the-temple-transfer-of-inhabitants-to-babylon-executions-in-ribla}}

\bibleverse{12} Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month,
which was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, who stood before the king of
Babylon, came into Jerusalem. \bibleverse{13} He burned Yahweh's house,
and the king's house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great
house, he burned with fire. \bibleverse{14} All the army of the
Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard, broke down all the
walls of Jerusalem all around. \bibleverse{15} Then Nebuzaradan the
captain of the guard carried away captive of the poorest of the people,
and the rest of the people who were left in the city, and those who fell
away, who defected to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the
multitude. \bibleverse{16} But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left
of the poorest of the land to be vineyard keepers and farmers.
\bibleverse{17} The Chaldeans broke the pillars of bronze that were in
Yahweh's house and the bases and the bronze sea that were in Yahweh's
house in pieces, and carried all of their bronze to Babylon.
\bibleverse{18} They also took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers,
the basins, the spoons, and all the vessels of bronze with which they
ministered. \bibleverse{19} The captain of the guard took away the cups,
the fire pans, the basins, the pots, the lamp stands, the spoons, and
the bowls; that which was of gold, as gold, and that which was of
silver, as silver. \bibleverse{20} They took the two pillars, the one
sea, and the twelve bronze bulls that were under the bases, which King
Solomon had made for Yahweh's house. The bronze of all these vessels was
without weight. \bibleverse{21} As for the pillars, the height of the
one pillar was eighteen cubits;\footnote{\textbf{52:21} A cubit is the
  length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man's arm,
  or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.} and a line of twelve cubits
encircled it; and its thickness was four fingers. It was hollow.
\bibleverse{22} A capital of bronze was on it; and the height of the one
capital was five cubits,\footnote{\textbf{52:22} A cubit is the length
  from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man's arm, or
  about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.} with network and pomegranates on
the capital all around, all of bronze. The second pillar also had the
same, with pomegranates. \bibleverse{23} There were ninety-six
pomegranates on the sides; all the pomegranates were one hundred on the
network all around. \bibleverse{24} The captain of the guard took
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three
keepers of the threshold, \bibleverse{25} and out of the city he took an
officer who was set over the men of war; and seven men of those who saw
the king's face, who were found in the city; and the scribe of the
captain of the army, who mustered the people of the land; and sixty men
of the people of the land, who were found in the middle of the city.
\bibleverse{26} Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and
brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah. \bibleverse{27} The king
of Babylon struck them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land of
Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land.

\hypertarget{the-numbers-that-were-taken}{%
\subsection{The numbers that were
taken}\label{the-numbers-that-were-taken}}

\bibleverse{28} This is the number of the people whom Nebuchadnezzar
carried away captive: in the seventh year, three thousand twenty-three
Jews; \bibleverse{29} in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, he
carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty-two persons;
\bibleverse{30} in the twenty-third year of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan
the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred
forty-five people. All the people numbered four thousand six hundred.

\hypertarget{johachuxedn-pardoned-after-thirty-seven-years-in-prison}{%
\subsection{Johachín pardoned after thirty-seven years in
prison}\label{johachuxedn-pardoned-after-thirty-seven-years-in-prison}}

\bibleverse{31} In the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of
Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty-fifth day
of the month, Evilmerodach king of Babylon, in the first year of his
reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and released him
from prison. \bibleverse{32} He spoke kindly to him, and set his throne
above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon,
\bibleverse{33} and changed his prison garments. Jehoiachin ate bread
before him continually all the days of his life. \bibleverse{34} For his
allowance, there was a continual allowance given him by the king of
Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of
his life. \end{otherlanguage} \end{paracol}
