\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{lamento-la-miseria-de-la-ciudad}{%
\subsection{Lamento la miseria de la
ciudad}\label{lamento-la-miseria-de-la-ciudad}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Cómo la ciudad se sienta solitaria, ¡que estaba lleno de
gente! Se ha convertido en una viuda, ¡que era grande entre las
naciones! La que fue princesa entre las provincias¡se ha convertido en
un esclavo! \footnote{\textbf{1:1} Jer 51,5} \bibleverse{2} Llora
amargamente en la noche. Sus lágrimas están en sus mejillas. Entre todos
sus amantesno tiene a nadie que la consuele. Todos sus amigos la han
tratado a traición. Se han convertido en sus enemigos. \footnote{\textbf{1:2}
  Sal 69,20} \bibleverse{3} Judá ha ido al cautiverio a causa de la
afliccióny por una gran servidumbre. Ella habita entre las naciones. No
encuentra descanso. Todos sus perseguidores la alcanzaron en su
angustia. \bibleverse{4} Los caminos de Sión están de luto, porque nadie
viene a la asamblea solemne. Todas sus puertas están desoladas. Sus
sacerdotes suspiran. Sus vírgenes están afligidas, y ella misma está en
la amargura. \bibleverse{5} Sus adversarios se han convertido en la
cabeza. Sus enemigos prosperan; porque Yahvé\footnote{\textbf{1:5}
  ``Yahvé'' es el nombre propio de Dios, a veces traducido como
  ``\textsc{Señor}'' (en mayúsculas) en otras traducciones.} la ha
afligido por la multitud de sus transgresiones. Sus hijos pequeños han
ido al cautiverio ante el adversario. \bibleverse{6} Toda la majestad se
ha alejado de la hija de Sión. Sus príncipes se han vuelto como ciervos
que no encuentran pasto. Se han ido sin fuerzas ante el perseguidor.
\bibleverse{7} Jerusalén recuerda en los días de su aflicción y de sus
miseriastodas sus cosas agradables que eran de los días de antaño;
cuando su pueblo cayó en manos del adversario, y nadie la ayudó. Los
adversarios la vieron. Se burlaron de sus desolaciones. \footnote{\textbf{1:7}
  Lev 26,34-35} \bibleverse{8} Jerusalén ha pecado gravemente. Por lo
tanto, se ha vuelto impura. Todos los que la honran la desprecian,
porque han visto su desnudez. Sí, suspira y se vuelve hacia atrás.
\footnote{\textbf{1:8} Lam 1,17; Jer 13,22} \bibleverse{9} Su suciedad
estaba en sus faldas. No recordaba su último final. Por lo tanto, ha
bajado de forma asombrosa. No tiene edredón. ``Mira, Yahvé, mi
aflicción; porque el enemigo se ha engrandecido''. \bibleverse{10} El
adversario ha extendido su mano sobre todas sus cosas agradables; porque
ha visto que las naciones han entrado en su santuario, sobre los que
ordenaste que no entraran en tu asamblea. \footnote{\textbf{1:10} Deut
  23,3} \bibleverse{11} Todo su pueblo suspira. Buscan el pan. Han dado
sus cosas agradables por alimento para refrescar su alma. ``Mira, Yahvé,
y ve, porque he llegado a ser despreciado''.

\hypertarget{desafortunadamente-la-ciudad-se-llenuxf3-de-lamentos-y-confesiones-arrepentidas}{%
\subsection{Desafortunadamente, la ciudad se llenó de lamentos y
confesiones
arrepentidas}\label{desafortunadamente-la-ciudad-se-llenuxf3-de-lamentos-y-confesiones-arrepentidas}}

\bibleverse{12} ``¿No os parece nada a todos los que pasáis por allí?
Mira, y ve si hay alguna pena como la mía, que se me ha echado encima,
con la que Yahvé me ha afligido en el día de su feroz ira. \footnote{\textbf{1:12}
  Lam 1,5} \bibleverse{13} ``Desde lo alto ha enviado fuego a mis
huesos, y prevalece contra ellos. Ha tendido una red para mis pies. Me
ha hecho volver. Me ha dejado desolado y desfallezco todo el día.
\bibleverse{14} ``El yugo de mis transgresiones está atado por su mano.
Están unidos. Han subido a mi cuello. Hizo que me faltaran las fuerzas.
El Señor\footnote{\textbf{1:14} La palabra traducida ``Señor'' es
  ``Adonai''.} me ha entregado en sus manos, contra el que no soy capaz
de resistir. \bibleverse{15} ``El Señor ha puesto en cero a todos mis
valientes dentro de mí. Ha convocado una asamblea solemne contra mí para
aplastar a mis jóvenes. El Señor ha pisado a la hija virgen de Judá como
en un lagar. \footnote{\textbf{1:15} Is 63,3} \bibleverse{16} ``Por
estas cosas lloro. Mi ojo, mi ojo se llena de agua, porque el consolador
que debería refrescar mi alma está lejos de mí. Mis hijos están
desolados, porque el enemigo ha prevalecido''. \footnote{\textbf{1:16}
  Jer 9,1} \bibleverse{17} Sión extiende sus manos. No hay nadie que la
consuele. Yahvé ha ordenado con respecto a Jacob, que los que le rodean
sean sus adversarios. Jerusalén está entre ellos como una cosa inmunda.
\footnote{\textbf{1:17} Lam 1,8}

\hypertarget{la-oraciuxf3n-de-sion-a-dios-pidiendo-ayuda-y-venganza-contra-los-enemigos}{%
\subsection{La oración de Sion a Dios pidiendo ayuda y venganza contra
los
enemigos}\label{la-oraciuxf3n-de-sion-a-dios-pidiendo-ayuda-y-venganza-contra-los-enemigos}}

\bibleverse{18} ``Yahvé es justo, porque me he rebelado contra su
mandamiento. Por favor, escuchen a todos los pueblos, y ver mi dolor.
Mis vírgenes y mis jóvenes han ido al cautiverio. \footnote{\textbf{1:18}
  Lam 3,42; Lam 5,16} \bibleverse{19} ``Llamé a mis amantes, pero me
engañaron. Mis sacerdotes y mis ancianos entregaron el espíritu en la
ciudad, mientras buscaban comida para refrescar sus almas. \footnote{\textbf{1:19}
  Lam 1,11} \bibleverse{20} ``Mira, Yahvé, porque estoy en apuros. Mi
corazón está preocupado. Mi corazón da un vuelco dentro de mí, porque me
he rebelado gravemente. En el extranjero, la espada se desprende. En
casa, es como la muerte. \bibleverse{21} ``Han oído que suspiro. No hay
nadie que me consuele. Todos mis enemigos han oído hablar de mi
problema. Se alegran de que lo hayas hecho. Traerás el día que has
proclamado, y serán como yo. \footnote{\textbf{1:21} Lam 4,21}
\bibleverse{22} ``Quetoda su maldad se presente ante ti. Haz con ellos
lo que has hecho conmigo por todas mis transgresiones. Porque mis
suspiros son muchos, y mi corazón desfallece.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} How the city sits solitary, that was full of people! She
has become as a widow, who was great among the nations! She who was a
princess among the provinces has become a slave! \bibleverse{2} She
weeps bitterly in the night. Her tears are on her cheeks. Among all her
lovers she has no one to comfort her. All her friends have dealt
treacherously with her. They have become her enemies. \bibleverse{3}
Judah has gone into captivity because of affliction and because of great
servitude. She dwells among the nations. She finds no rest. All her
persecutors overtook her in her distress. \bibleverse{4} The roads to
Zion mourn, because no one comes to the solemn assembly. All her gates
are desolate. Her priests sigh. Her virgins are afflicted, and she
herself is in bitterness. \bibleverse{5} Her adversaries have become the
head. Her enemies prosper; for Yahweh\footnote{\textbf{1:5} ``Yahweh''
  is God's proper Name, sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}'' (all caps)
  in other translations.} has afflicted her for the multitude of her
transgressions. Her young children have gone into captivity before the
adversary. \bibleverse{6} All majesty has departed from the daughter of
Zion. Her princes have become like deer that find no pasture. They have
gone without strength before the pursuer. \bibleverse{7} Jerusalem
remembers in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her
pleasant things that were from the days of old; when her people fell
into the hand of the adversary, and no one helped her. The adversaries
saw her. They mocked at her desolations. \bibleverse{8} Jerusalem has
grievously sinned. Therefore she has become unclean. All who honored her
despise her, because they have seen her nakedness. Yes, she sighs and
turns backward. \bibleverse{9} Her filthiness was in her skirts. She
didn't remember her latter end. Therefore she has come down
astoundingly. She has no comforter. ``See, Yahweh, my affliction; for
the enemy has magnified himself.'' \bibleverse{10} The adversary has
spread out his hand on all her pleasant things; for she has seen that
the nations have entered into her sanctuary, concerning whom you
commanded that they should not enter into your assembly. \bibleverse{11}
All her people sigh. They seek bread. They have given their pleasant
things for food to refresh their soul. ``Look, Yahweh, and see, for I
have become despised.'' \bibleverse{12} ``Is it nothing to you, all you
who pass by? Look, and see if there is any sorrow like my sorrow, which
is brought on me, with which Yahweh has afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger. \bibleverse{13} ``From on high has he sent fire into my
bones, and it prevails against them. He has spread a net for my feet. He
has turned me back. He has made me desolate and I faint all day long.
\bibleverse{14} ``The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand.
They are knit together. They have come up on my neck. He made my
strength fail. The Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:14} The word translated
  ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} has delivered me into their hands, against
whom I am not able to stand. \bibleverse{15} ``The Lord has set at
nothing all my mighty men within me. He has called a solemn assembly
against me to crush my young men. The Lord has trodden the virgin
daughter of Judah as in a wine press. \bibleverse{16} ``For these things
I weep. My eye, my eye runs down with water, because the comforter who
should refresh my soul is far from me. My children are desolate, because
the enemy has prevailed.'' \bibleverse{17} Zion spreads out her hands.
There is no one to comfort her. Yahweh has commanded concerning Jacob,
that those who are around him should be his adversaries. Jerusalem is
among them as an unclean thing. \bibleverse{18} ``Yahweh is righteous,
for I have rebelled against his commandment. Please hear all you
peoples, and see my sorrow. My virgins and my young men have gone into
captivity. \bibleverse{19} ``I called for my lovers, but they deceived
me. My priests and my elders gave up the spirit in the city, while they
sought food for themselves to refresh their souls. \bibleverse{20}
``Look, Yahweh; for I am in distress. My heart is troubled. My heart
turns over within me, for I have grievously rebelled. Abroad, the sword
bereaves. At home, it is like death. \bibleverse{21} ``They have heard
that I sigh. There is no one to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of
my trouble. They are glad that you have done it. You will bring the day
that you have proclaimed, and they will be like me. \bibleverse{22}
``Let all their wickedness come before you. Do to them as you have done
to me for all my transgressions. For my sighs are many, and my heart is
faint.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{descripciuxf3n-de-la-calamidad-de-la-cual-la-tierra-y-la-gente-y-especialmente-jerusaluxe9n-se-ven-afectados-por-la-ira-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Descripción de la calamidad de la cual la tierra y la gente
y especialmente Jerusalén se ven afectados por la ira de
Dios}\label{descripciuxf3n-de-la-calamidad-de-la-cual-la-tierra-y-la-gente-y-especialmente-jerusaluxe9n-se-ven-afectados-por-la-ira-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} ¡Cómo ha cubierto el Señor a la hija de Sión con una nube
en su ira! Ha hecho descender del cielo a la tierra la belleza de
Israel, y no se ha acordado de su escabel en el día de su ira.
\footnote{\textbf{2:1} 1Cró 28,2} \bibleverse{2} El Señor se ha tragado
todas las moradas de Jacobsin piedad. Ha derribado en su ira las
fortalezas de la hija de Judá. Los ha hecho caer al suelo. Ha profanado
el reino y sus príncipes. \bibleverse{3} Ha cortado todo el cuerno de
Israel con feroz ira. Ha retirado su mano derecha de delante del
enemigo. Ha quemado a Jacob como un fuego ardiente, que devora todo a su
alrededor. \bibleverse{4} Ha doblado su arco como un enemigo. Se ha
levantado con su mano derecha como adversario. Ha matado todo lo que era
agradable a la vista. En la tienda de la hija de Sión, ha derramado su
ira como el fuego. \footnote{\textbf{2:4} Sal 7,12} \bibleverse{5} El
Señor se ha convertido en un enemigo. Se ha tragado a Israel. Se ha
tragado todos sus palacios. Ha destruido sus fortalezas. Ha multiplicado
el luto y el lamento en la hija de Judá. \bibleverse{6} Se ha llevado
violentamente su tabernáculo, como si fuera un jardín. Ha destruido su
lugar de reunión. Yahvé ha hecho olvidar la asamblea solemne y el sábado
en Sión. En la indignación de su ira, ha despreciado al rey y al
sacerdote. \bibleverse{7} El Señor ha desechado su altar. Ha aborrecido
su santuario. Ha entregado los muros de sus palacios en manos del
enemigo. Han hecho ruido en la casa de Yahvé, como en el día de una
asamblea solemne. \footnote{\textbf{2:7} Lam 2,22} \bibleverse{8} Yahvé
se ha propuesto destruir el muro de la hija de Sión. Ha estirado la
línea. No ha retirado su mano de la destrucción; Ha hecho que la muralla
y el muro se lamenten. Languidecen juntos. \bibleverse{9} Sus puertas se
han hundido en la tierra. Ha destruido y roto sus barrotes. Su rey y sus
príncipes están entre las naciones donde no hay ley. Sí, sus profetas no
encuentran ninguna visión de Yahvé. \bibleverse{10} Los ancianos de la
hija de Sión se sientan en el suelo. Guardan silencio. Han levantado
polvo sobre sus cabezas. Se han vestido de cilicio. Las vírgenes de
Jerusalén bajan la cabeza hasta el suelo.

\hypertarget{pensamientos-y-sentimientos-del-escritor-y-el-mundo-exterior-dios-cumpliuxf3-su-consejo}{%
\subsection{Pensamientos y sentimientos del escritor y el mundo
exterior; Dios cumplió su
consejo}\label{pensamientos-y-sentimientos-del-escritor-y-el-mundo-exterior-dios-cumpliuxf3-su-consejo}}

\bibleverse{11} Mis ojos fallan con las lágrimas. Mi corazón está
preocupado. Mi bilis se derrama sobre la tierra, por la destrucción de
la hija de mi pueblo, porque los niños pequeños y los infantes se
desmayan en las calles de la ciudad. \bibleverse{12} Le preguntan a sus
madres, ``¿Dónde está el grano y el vino?''cuando se desmayan como los
heridos en las calles de la ciudad, cuando su alma se vierte en el seno
de su madre. \bibleverse{13} ¿Qué te voy a testificar? ¿A qué te
compararé, hija de Jerusalén? Qué voy a comparar contigo, ¿para que te
consuele, virgen hija de Sión? Porque tu brecha es tan grande como el
mar. ¿Quién puede curarte? \bibleverse{14} Tus profetas han visto
visiones falsas y necias para ti. No han descubierto tu iniquidad, para
revertir su cautiverio, sino que han visto para ustedes falsas
revelaciones y causas de destierro. \footnote{\textbf{2:14} Jer
  14,14-16; Jer 23,14-22} \bibleverse{15} Todos los que pasan te
aplauden. Sisean y mueven la cabeza ante la hija de Jerusalén, diciendo,
``¿Es esta la ciudad que los hombres llamaron `La perfección de la
belleza', la alegría de toda la tierra''? \footnote{\textbf{2:15} Sal
  48,2; Ezeq 16,14} \bibleverse{16} Todos tus enemigos han abierto su
boca contra ti. Sisean y rechinan los dientes. Dicen: ``Nos la hemos
tragado. Ciertamente, este es el día que buscábamos. Lo hemos
encontrado. Lo hemos visto''. \footnote{\textbf{2:16} Job 16,9; Sal
  35,25; Sal 137,7} \bibleverse{17} Yahvé ha hecho lo que había
planeado. Ha cumplido su palabra que ordenó en los días de antaño. Se ha
tirado al suelo, y no se ha compadecido. Ha hecho que el enemigo se
alegre de ti. Ha exaltado el cuerno de tus adversarios.

\hypertarget{invitaciuxf3n-a-sion-para-clamar-a-dios-por-misericordia-el-clamor-de-sion-pidiendo-ayuda-y-una-pregunta-terrible-a-dios}{%
\subsection{Invitación a Sion para clamar a Dios por misericordia; El
clamor de Sion pidiendo ayuda y una pregunta terrible a
Dios}\label{invitaciuxf3n-a-sion-para-clamar-a-dios-por-misericordia-el-clamor-de-sion-pidiendo-ayuda-y-una-pregunta-terrible-a-dios}}

\bibleverse{18} Su corazón clamaba al Señor. Oh, muro de la hija de
Sión, deja que las lágrimas corran como un río día y noche. No te
desahogues. No dejes que tus ojos descansen. \footnote{\textbf{2:18} Lam
  2,11} \bibleverse{19} Levántate, grita en la noche, ¡al principio de
los relojes! Derrama tu corazón como agua ante el rostro del Señor.
Levanta tus manos hacia él por la vida de tus hijos pequeños, que se
desmayan de hambre a la cabeza de cada calle. \bibleverse{20} ``¡Mira,
Yahvé, y mira a quién has hecho así! ¿Deberían las mujeres comerse a sus
crías, los niños que sostenían y hacían rebotar sobre sus rodillas?
¿Deben morir el sacerdote y el profeta en el santuario del Señor?
\footnote{\textbf{2:20} Deut 28,53-57} \bibleverse{21} ``El joven y el
anciano yacen en el suelo en las calles. Mis vírgenes y mis jóvenes han
caído por la espada. Los has matado en el día de tu ira. Has masacrado,
y no has compadecido. \bibleverse{22} ``Has convocado, como en el día de
una asamblea solemne, mis terrores por todos lados. No hubo nadie que
escapara o permaneciera en el día de la ira de Yahvé. Mi enemigo ha
consumido a los que he cuidado y criado. \footnote{\textbf{2:22} Lam 2,7}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a
cloud in his anger! He has cast the beauty of Israel down from heaven to
the earth, and hasn't remembered his footstool in the day of his anger.
\bibleverse{2} The Lord has swallowed up all the dwellings of Jacob
without pity. He has thrown down in his wrath the strongholds of the
daughter of Judah. He has brought them down to the ground. He has
profaned the kingdom and its princes. \bibleverse{3} He has cut off all
the horn of Israel in fierce anger. He has drawn back his right hand
from before the enemy. He has burned up Jacob like a flaming fire, which
devours all around. \bibleverse{4} He has bent his bow like an enemy. He
has stood with his right hand as an adversary. He has killed all that
were pleasant to the eye. In the tent of the daughter of Zion, he has
poured out his wrath like fire. \bibleverse{5} The Lord has become as an
enemy. He has swallowed up Israel. He has swallowed up all her palaces.
He has destroyed his strongholds. He has multiplied mourning and
lamentation in the daughter of Judah. \bibleverse{6} He has violently
taken away his tabernacle, as if it were a garden. He has destroyed his
place of assembly. Yahweh has caused solemn assembly and Sabbath to be
forgotten in Zion. In the indignation of his anger, he has despised the
king and the priest. \bibleverse{7} The Lord has cast off his altar. He
has abhorred his sanctuary. He has given the walls of her palaces into
the hand of the enemy. They have made a noise in Yahweh's house, as in
the day of a solemn assembly. \bibleverse{8} Yahweh has purposed to
destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion. He has stretched out the line.
He has not withdrawn his hand from destroying; He has made the rampart
and wall lament. They languish together. \bibleverse{9} Her gates have
sunk into the ground. He has destroyed and broken her bars. Her king and
her princes are among the nations where the law is not. Yes, her
prophets find no vision from Yahweh. \bibleverse{10} The elders of the
daughter of Zion sit on the ground. They keep silence. They have cast up
dust on their heads. They have clothed themselves with sackcloth. The
virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
\bibleverse{11} My eyes fail with tears. My heart is troubled. My bile
is poured on the earth, because of the destruction of the daughter of my
people, because the young children and the infants swoon in the streets
of the city. \bibleverse{12} They ask their mothers, ``Where is grain
and wine?'' when they swoon as the wounded in the streets of the city,
when their soul is poured out into their mothers' bosom. \bibleverse{13}
What shall I testify to you? What shall I liken to you, daughter of
Jerusalem? What shall I compare to you, that I may comfort you, virgin
daughter of Zion? For your breach is as big as the sea. Who can heal
you? \bibleverse{14} Your prophets have seen false and foolish visions
for you. They have not uncovered your iniquity, to reverse your
captivity, but have seen for you false revelations and causes of
banishment. \bibleverse{15} All that pass by clap their hands at you.
They hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, ``Is
this the city that men called `The perfection of beauty, the joy of the
whole earth'?'' \bibleverse{16} All your enemies have opened their mouth
wide against you. They hiss and gnash their teeth. They say, ``We have
swallowed her up. Certainly this is the day that we looked for. We have
found it. We have seen it.'' \bibleverse{17} Yahweh has done that which
he planned. He has fulfilled his word that he commanded in the days of
old. He has thrown down, and has not pitied. He has caused the enemy to
rejoice over you. He has exalted the horn of your adversaries.
\bibleverse{18} Their heart cried to the Lord. O wall of the daughter of
Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night. Give yourself no
relief. Don't let your eyes rest. \bibleverse{19} Arise, cry out in the
night, at the beginning of the watches! Pour out your heart like water
before the face of the Lord. Lift up your hands toward him for the life
of your young children, who faint for hunger at the head of every
street. \bibleverse{20} ``Look, Yahweh, and see to whom you have done
thus! Should the women eat their offspring, the children that they held
and bounced on their knees? Should the priest and the prophet be killed
in the sanctuary of the Lord? \bibleverse{21} ``The youth and the old
man lie on the ground in the streets. My virgins and my young men have
fallen by the sword. You have killed them in the day of your anger. You
have slaughtered, and not pitied. \bibleverse{22} ``You have called, as
in the day of a solemn assembly, my terrors on every side. There was no
one that escaped or remained in the day of Yahweh's anger. My enemy has
consumed those whom I have cared for and brought up.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{queja-desesperada-de-un-solo-compauxf1ero-nacional-por-los-difuxedciles-juicios-sufridos-pide-gracia-y-esperanza-por-una-nueva-salvaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Queja desesperada de un solo compañero nacional por los
difíciles juicios sufridos; Pide gracia y esperanza por una nueva
salvación}\label{queja-desesperada-de-un-solo-compauxf1ero-nacional-por-los-difuxedciles-juicios-sufridos-pide-gracia-y-esperanza-por-una-nueva-salvaciuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Soy el hombre que ha visto la aflicciónpor la vara de su
ira. \bibleverse{2} Me ha guiado y me ha hecho caminar en la oscuridad,
y no en la luz. \bibleverse{3} Ciertamente, vuelve su mano contra míuna
y otra vez durante todo el día. \bibleverse{4} Ha envejecido mi carne y
mi piel. Me ha roto los huesos. \bibleverse{5} Ha construido contra mí,
y me rodeó de amargura y penurias. \bibleverse{6} Me ha hecho habitar en
lugares oscuros, como los que llevan mucho tiempo muertos. \footnote{\textbf{3:6}
  Sal 143,3} \bibleverse{7} Me ha amurallado para que no pueda salir. Ha
hecho que mi cadena sea pesada. \footnote{\textbf{3:7} Job 19,8}
\bibleverse{8} Sí, cuando lloro y pido ayuda, él cierra mi oración.
\footnote{\textbf{3:8} Sal 22,2; Sal 69,3} \bibleverse{9} Ha amurallado
mis caminos con piedra cortada. Ha hecho que mis caminos sean torcidos.
\bibleverse{10} Es para mí como un oso al acecho, como un león
escondido. \footnote{\textbf{3:10} Job 10,16} \bibleverse{11} Ha
desviado mi camino, y me ha hecho pedazos. Me ha dejado desolado.
\bibleverse{12} Ha doblado su arco, y me puso como marca para la flecha.
\bibleverse{13} Ha hecho que las astas de su carcaj entren en mis
riñones. \bibleverse{14} Me he convertido en una burla para todo mi
pueblo, y su canción durante todo el día. \footnote{\textbf{3:14} Job
  30,9} \bibleverse{15} Me ha llenado de amargura. Me ha llenado de
ajenjo. \bibleverse{16} También me ha roto los dientes con gravilla. Me
ha cubierto de cenizas. \bibleverse{17} Has alejado mi alma de la paz.
Me olvidé de la prosperidad. \bibleverse{18} Dije: ``Mis fuerzas han
perecido, junto con mi expectativa de Yahvé''. \bibleverse{19} Acuérdate
de mi aflicción y de mi miseria, el ajenjo y la amargura.
\bibleverse{20} Mi alma aún los recuerda, y se inclina dentro de mí.
\bibleverse{21} Esto lo recuerdo en mi mente; por lo tanto, tengo
esperanza. \bibleverse{22} Es por las bondades amorosas de Yahvé que no
somos consumidos, porque sus misericordias no fallan. \footnote{\textbf{3:22}
  Neh 9,31} \bibleverse{23} Son nuevos cada mañana. Grande es tu
fidelidad. \bibleverse{24} ``Yahvé es mi porción'', dice mi alma. ``Por
lo tanto, esperaré en él''. \footnote{\textbf{3:24} Sal 16,5; Sal 73,26}

\hypertarget{referencia-a-la-bondad-y-misericordia-de-dios-al-pecado-y-la-destrucciuxf3n-del-pueblo-y-a-la-participaciuxf3n-del-escritor-en-el-destino-de-su-pueblo}{%
\subsection{Referencia a la bondad y misericordia de Dios, al pecado y
la destrucción del pueblo y a la participación del escritor en el
destino de su
pueblo}\label{referencia-a-la-bondad-y-misericordia-de-dios-al-pecado-y-la-destrucciuxf3n-del-pueblo-y-a-la-participaciuxf3n-del-escritor-en-el-destino-de-su-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{25} El Señor es bueno con los que lo esperan, al alma que lo
busca. \bibleverse{26} Es bueno que el hombre esperey esperar
tranquilamente la salvación de Yahvé. \footnote{\textbf{3:26} Rom 12,12}
\bibleverse{27} Es bueno para el hombre que lleve el yugo en su
juventud. \bibleverse{28} Que se siente solo y guarde silencio, porque
se lo ha puesto a él. \bibleverse{29} Que ponga su boca en el polvo, si
es para que haya esperanza. \bibleverse{30} Que dé su mejilla al que lo
golpea. Que se llene de reproches. \bibleverse{31} Porque el Señor no
desechará para siempre. \bibleverse{32} Porque aunque cause dolor, pero
tendrá compasión según la multitud de sus bondades. \footnote{\textbf{3:32}
  Is 54,8} \bibleverse{33} Porque no se aflige voluntariamente, ni
afligir a los hijos de los hombres. \bibleverse{34} Para aplastar bajo
los pies a todos los prisioneros de la tierra, \bibleverse{35} para
apartar el derecho de un hombre ante la faz del Altísimo,
\bibleverse{36} para subvertir a un hombre en su causa, el Señor no lo
aprueba. \bibleverse{37} Quién es el que dice, y se cumple, cuando el
Señor no lo ordena? \footnote{\textbf{3:37} Is 45,7; Am 3,6}
\bibleverse{38} ¿No sale el mal y el bien de la boca del Altísimo?
\bibleverse{39} ¿Por qué debería quejarse un hombre vivo? un hombre para
el castigo de sus pecados? \bibleverse{40} Busquemos y probemos nuestros
caminos, y volver a Yahvé. \bibleverse{41} Elevemos nuestro corazón con
nuestras manos a Dios\footnote{\textbf{3:41} La palabra hebrea traducida
  como ``Dios'' es ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} en los cielos.
\bibleverse{42} ``Hemos transgredido y nos hemos rebelado. No has
perdonado. \footnote{\textbf{3:42} Sal 106,6; Dan 9,5} \bibleverse{43}
``Nos has cubierto de ira y nos has perseguido. Has matado. No te has
compadecido. \bibleverse{44} Te has cubierto con una nube, para que
ninguna oración pueda pasar. \bibleverse{45} Nos has convertido en un
despojo y en una basuraen medio de los pueblos. \bibleverse{46} ``Todos
nuestros enemigos han abierto su boca contra nosotros. \bibleverse{47}
El terror y la fosa han llegado a nosotros, devastación y destrucción''.
\bibleverse{48} Mi ojo corre con chorros de agua, para la destrucción de
la hija de mi pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{3:48} Jer 9,1} \bibleverse{49}
Mi ojo se derramay no cesa, sin ningún intermedio, \bibleverse{50} hasta
que Yahvé mire hacia abajo, y ve desde el cielo. \bibleverse{51} Mi ojo
afecta a mi alma, por todas las hijas de mi ciudad. \footnote{\textbf{3:51}
  Lam 2,11}

\hypertarget{nueva-denuncia-del-infeliz-camarada-nacional-pide-rescate-y-venganza-del-enemigo}{%
\subsection{Nueva denuncia del infeliz camarada nacional; Pide rescate y
venganza del
enemigo}\label{nueva-denuncia-del-infeliz-camarada-nacional-pide-rescate-y-venganza-del-enemigo}}

\bibleverse{52} Me han perseguido implacablemente como un pájaro, los
que son mis enemigos sin causa. \bibleverse{53} Me han cortado la vida
en el calabozo, y han arrojado una piedra sobre mí. \bibleverse{54} Las
aguas fluyeron sobre mi cabeza. Dije: ``Estoy aislado''. \bibleverse{55}
Invocaba tu nombre, Yahvé, de la mazmorra más baja. \footnote{\textbf{3:55}
  Sal 130,1} \bibleverse{56} Has oído mi voz: ``No escondas tu oído de
mis suspiros, y mi grito''. \bibleverse{57} Te acercaste el día que te
invoqué. Dijiste: ``No tengas miedo''. \bibleverse{58} Señor, tú has
defendido las causas de mi alma. Has redimido mi vida. \bibleverse{59}
Yahvé, tú has visto mi error. Juzga mi causa. \bibleverse{60} Has visto
toda su venganzay todos sus planes contra mí. \bibleverse{61} Tú has
escuchado su reproche, Yahvé, y todos sus planes contra mí,
\bibleverse{62} los labios de los que se levantaron contra mí, y sus
complots contra mí durante todo el día. \bibleverse{63} Ves que se
sientan y se levantan. Yo soy su canción. \footnote{\textbf{3:63} Lam
  3,14} \bibleverse{64} Tú les pagarás, Yahvé, según el trabajo de sus
manos. \footnote{\textbf{3:64} Lam 1,21; Sal 137,8} \bibleverse{65} Les
darás dureza de corazón, su maldición a ellos. \bibleverse{66} Los
perseguirás con ira, y destruirlos de debajo de los cielos de Yahvé.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} I am the man who has seen affliction by the rod of his
wrath. \bibleverse{2} He has led me and caused me to walk in darkness,
and not in light. \bibleverse{3} Surely he turns his hand against me
again and again all day long. \bibleverse{4} He has made my flesh and my
skin old. He has broken my bones. \bibleverse{5} He has built against
me, and surrounded me with bitterness and hardship. \bibleverse{6} He
has made me dwell in dark places, as those who have been long dead.
\bibleverse{7} He has walled me about, so that I can't go out. He has
made my chain heavy. \bibleverse{8} Yes, when I cry, and call for help,
he shuts out my prayer. \bibleverse{9} He has walled up my ways with cut
stone. He has made my paths crooked. \bibleverse{10} He is to me as a
bear lying in wait, as a lion in hiding. \bibleverse{11} He has turned
away my path, and pulled me in pieces. He has made me desolate.
\bibleverse{12} He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.
\bibleverse{13} He has caused the shafts of his quiver to enter into my
kidneys. \bibleverse{14} I have become a derision to all my people, and
their song all day long. \bibleverse{15} He has filled me with
bitterness. He has stuffed me with wormwood. \bibleverse{16} He has also
broken my teeth with gravel. He has covered me with ashes.
\bibleverse{17} You have removed my soul far away from peace. I forgot
prosperity. \bibleverse{18} I said, ``My strength has perished, along
with my expectation from Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{19} Remember my
affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the bitterness.
\bibleverse{20} My soul still remembers them, and is bowed down within
me. \bibleverse{21} This I recall to my mind; therefore I have hope.
\bibleverse{22} It is because of Yahweh's loving kindnesses that we are
not consumed, because his mercies don't fail. \bibleverse{23} They are
new every morning. Great is your faithfulness. \bibleverse{24} ``Yahweh
is my portion,'' says my soul. ``Therefore I will hope in him.''
\bibleverse{25} Yahweh is good to those who wait for him, to the soul
who seeks him. \bibleverse{26} It is good that a man should hope and
quietly wait for the salvation of Yahweh. \bibleverse{27} It is good for
a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. \bibleverse{28} Let him sit
alone and keep silence, because he has laid it on him. \bibleverse{29}
Let him put his mouth in the dust, if it is so that there may be hope.
\bibleverse{30} Let him give his cheek to him who strikes him. Let him
be filled full of reproach. \bibleverse{31} For the Lord will not cast
off forever. \bibleverse{32} For though he causes grief, yet he will
have compassion according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
\bibleverse{33} For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men. \bibleverse{34} To crush under foot all the prisoners
of the earth, \bibleverse{35} to turn away the right of a man before the
face of the Most High, \bibleverse{36} to subvert a man in his cause,
the Lord doesn't approve. \bibleverse{37} Who is he who says, and it
comes to pass, when the Lord doesn't command it? \bibleverse{38} Doesn't
evil and good come out of the mouth of the Most High? \bibleverse{39}
Why should a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
\bibleverse{40} Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to
Yahweh. \bibleverse{41} Let's lift up our heart with our hands to
God\footnote{\textbf{3:41} The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is
  ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} in the heavens. \bibleverse{42} ``We
have transgressed and have rebelled. You have not pardoned.
\bibleverse{43} ``You have covered us with anger and pursued us. You
have killed. You have not pitied. \bibleverse{44} You have covered
yourself with a cloud, so that no prayer can pass through.
\bibleverse{45} You have made us an off-scouring and refuse in the
middle of the peoples. \bibleverse{46} ``All our enemies have opened
their mouth wide against us. \bibleverse{47} Terror and the pit have
come on us, devastation and destruction.'' \bibleverse{48} My eye runs
down with streams of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people. \bibleverse{49} My eye pours down and doesn't cease, without any
intermission, \bibleverse{50} until Yahweh looks down, and sees from
heaven. \bibleverse{51} My eye affects my soul, because of all the
daughters of my city. \bibleverse{52} They have chased me relentlessly
like a bird, those who are my enemies without cause. \bibleverse{53}
They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and have cast a stone on me.
\bibleverse{54} Waters flowed over my head. I said, ``I am cut off.''
\bibleverse{55} I called on your name, Yahweh, out of the lowest
dungeon. \bibleverse{56} You heard my voice: ``Don't hide your ear from
my sighing, and my cry.'' \bibleverse{57} You came near in the day that
I called on you. You said, ``Don't be afraid.'' \bibleverse{58} Lord,
you have pleaded the causes of my soul. You have redeemed my life.
\bibleverse{59} Yahweh, you have seen my wrong. Judge my cause.
\bibleverse{60} You have seen all their vengeance and all their plans
against me. \bibleverse{61} You have heard their reproach, Yahweh, and
all their plans against me, \bibleverse{62} the lips of those that rose
up against me, and their plots against me all day long. \bibleverse{63}
You see their sitting down and their rising up. I am their song.
\bibleverse{64} You will pay them back, Yahweh, according to the work of
their hands. \bibleverse{65} You will give them hardness of heart, your
curse to them. \bibleverse{66} You will pursue them in anger, and
destroy them from under the heavens of Yahweh.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{descripciuxf3n-del-terrible-destino-de-toda-la-poblaciuxf3n-de-jerusaluxe9n-especialmente-los-niuxf1os}{%
\subsection{Descripción del terrible destino de toda la población de
Jerusalén, especialmente los
niños}\label{descripciuxf3n-del-terrible-destino-de-toda-la-poblaciuxf3n-de-jerusaluxe9n-especialmente-los-niuxf1os}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} ¡Cómo se ha oscurecido el oro! ¡El oro más puro ha
cambiado! Las piedras del santuario se derramana la cabeza de cada
calle. \footnote{\textbf{4:1} Lam 1,6; Lam 1,10} \bibleverse{2} Los
preciosos hijos de Sion, comparable al oro fino, como son estimados como
cántaros de tierra, ¡el trabajo de las manos del alfarero!
\bibleverse{3} Incluso los chacales ofrecen su pecho. Amamantan a sus
crías. Pero la hija de mi pueblo se ha vuelto cruel, como las avestruces
en el desierto. \bibleverse{4} La lengua del niño lactante se aferra al
paladar por la sed. Los niños pequeños piden pan, y nadie la rompe por
ellos. \bibleverse{5} Los que comían manjares están desolados en las
calles. Los que se criaron en la púrpura abrazan los estercoleros.
\bibleverse{6} Porque la iniquidad de la hija de mi pueblo es mayor que
el pecado de Sodoma, que fue derrocado como en un momento. No le
pusieron las manos encima. \footnote{\textbf{4:6} Gén 18,20; Gén
  19,24-25} \bibleverse{7} Sus nobles eran más puros que la nieve. Eran
más blancos que la leche. Tenían un cuerpo más rojizo que los rubíes. Su
pulido era como el zafiro. \bibleverse{8} Su aspecto es más negro que un
carbón. No son conocidos en las calles. Su piel se adhiere a sus huesos.
Se ha marchitado. Se ha vuelto como la madera. \bibleverse{9} Los que
mueren a espada son mejores que los que mueren de hambre; porque estos
se consumen, golpeados, por falta de los frutos del campo.
\bibleverse{10} Las manos de las mujeres lamentables han hervido a sus
propios hijos. Fueron su alimento en la destrucción de la hija de mi
pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{4:10} Lam 2,20} \bibleverse{11} Yahvé ha
cumplido su ira. Ha derramado su feroz ira. Ha encendido un fuego en
Sión, que ha devorado sus cimientos. \bibleverse{12} Los reyes de la
tierra no creyeron, tampoco lo hicieron todos los habitantes del mundo,
que el adversario y el enemigo entrarían por las puertas de Jerusalén.

\hypertarget{la-culpa-y-el-destino-de-los-sacerdotes-y-profetas-la-suerte-del-rey-y-sus-seguidores-deseo-de-venganza-contra-edom}{%
\subsection{La culpa y el destino de los sacerdotes y profetas; la
suerte del rey y sus seguidores; Deseo de venganza contra
Edom}\label{la-culpa-y-el-destino-de-los-sacerdotes-y-profetas-la-suerte-del-rey-y-sus-seguidores-deseo-de-venganza-contra-edom}}

\bibleverse{13} Es por los pecados de sus profetasy las iniquidades de
sus sacerdotes, que han derramado la sangre de los justos en medio de
ella. \bibleverse{14} Vagan como ciegos por las calles. Están
contaminados con sangre, Para que los hombres no puedan tocar sus
prendas. \bibleverse{15} ``¡Vete!'', les gritaron. ``¡Impuro! ¡Vete!
¡Vete! ¡No toques! Cuando huyeron y vagaron, los hombres dijeron entre
las naciones, ``Ya no pueden vivir aquí''. \bibleverse{16} La ira de
Yahvé los ha dispersado. Ya no les prestará atención. No respetaron las
personas de los sacerdotes. No favorecieron a los ancianos. \footnote{\textbf{4:16}
  Lam 5,12; Deut 28,50; Is 47,6} \bibleverse{17} Nuestros ojos siguen
fallando, buscando en vano nuestra ayuda. En nuestra vigilancia hemos
velado por una nación que no podía salvar. \bibleverse{18} Cazan
nuestros pasos, para que no podamos ir por nuestras calles. Nuestro fin
está cerca. Nuestros días se cumplen, porque nuestro fin ha llegado.
\bibleverse{19} Nuestros perseguidores eran más veloces que las águilas
del cielo. Nos persiguieron en las montañas. Nos tendieron una emboscada
en el desierto. \bibleverse{20} El aliento de nuestras narices, el
ungido de Yahvé, fue tomada en sus fosas; de quien dijimos, bajo su
sombra viviremos entre las naciones. \footnote{\textbf{4:20} Jer 52,8;
  Jer 52,11} \bibleverse{21} Regocíjate y alégrate, hija de Edom, que
habita en la tierra de Uz. La copa también pasará por ti. Estarás
borracho, y se desnudará. \footnote{\textbf{4:21} Lam 1,21; Sal 137,7;
  Jer 25,15; Jer 25,21} \bibleverse{22} El castigo de tu iniquidad se ha
cumplido, hija de Sión. Ya no te llevará al cautiverio. Él visitará tu
iniquidad, hija de Edom. Él descubrirá tus pecados. \footnote{\textbf{4:22}
  Is 40,2}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} How the gold has become dim! The most pure gold has
changed! The stones of the sanctuary are poured out at the head of every
street. \bibleverse{2} The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine
gold, how they are esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands
of the potter! \bibleverse{3} Even the jackals offer their breast. They
nurse their young ones. But the daughter of my people has become cruel,
like the ostriches in the wilderness. \bibleverse{4} The tongue of the
nursing child clings to the roof of his mouth for thirst. The young
children ask for bread, and no one breaks it for them. \bibleverse{5}
Those who ate delicacies are desolate in the streets. Those who were
brought up in purple embrace dunghills. \bibleverse{6} For the iniquity
of the daughter of my people is greater than the sin of Sodom, which was
overthrown as in a moment. No hands were laid on her. \bibleverse{7} Her
nobles were purer than snow. They were whiter than milk. They were more
ruddy in body than rubies. Their polishing was like sapphire.
\bibleverse{8} Their appearance is blacker than a coal. They are not
known in the streets. Their skin clings to their bones. It is withered.
It has become like wood. \bibleverse{9} Those who are killed with the
sword are better than those who are killed with hunger; for these pine
away, stricken through, for lack of the fruits of the field.
\bibleverse{10} The hands of the pitiful women have boiled their own
children. They were their food in the destruction of the daughter of my
people. \bibleverse{11} Yahweh has accomplished his wrath. He has poured
out his fierce anger. He has kindled a fire in Zion, which has devoured
its foundations. \bibleverse{12} The kings of the earth didn't believe,
neither did all the inhabitants of the world, that the adversary and the
enemy would enter into the gates of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{13} It is
because of the sins of her prophets and the iniquities of her priests,
that have shed the blood of the just in the middle of her.
\bibleverse{14} They wander as blind men in the streets. They are
polluted with blood, So that men can't touch their garments.
\bibleverse{15} ``Go away!'' they cried to them. ``Unclean! Go away! Go
away! Don't touch! When they fled away and wandered, men said among the
nations, ``They can't live here any more.'' \bibleverse{16} Yahweh's
anger has scattered them. He will not pay attention to them any more.
They didn't respect the persons of the priests. They didn't favor the
elders. \bibleverse{17} Our eyes still fail, looking in vain for our
help. In our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save.
\bibleverse{18} They hunt our steps, so that we can't go in our streets.
Our end is near. Our days are fulfilled, for our end has come.
\bibleverse{19} Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the sky.
They chased us on the mountains. They set an ambush for us in the
wilderness. \bibleverse{20} The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of
Yahweh, was taken in their pits; of whom we said, under his shadow we
will live among the nations. \bibleverse{21} Rejoice and be glad,
daughter of Edom, who dwells in the land of Uz. The cup will pass
through to you also. You will be drunken, and will make yourself naked.
\bibleverse{22} The punishment of your iniquity is accomplished,
daughter of Zion. He will no more carry you away into captivity. He will
visit your iniquity, daughter of Edom. He will uncover your sins.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{oraciuxf3n-de-la-comunidad-oprimida-por-misericordia-y-restauraciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Oración de la comunidad oprimida por misericordia y
restauración}\label{oraciuxf3n-de-la-comunidad-oprimida-por-misericordia-y-restauraciuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Acuérdate, Yahvé, de lo que nos ha ocurrido. Mira, y ve
nuestro reproche. \bibleverse{2} Nuestra herencia ha sido entregada a
extraños, nuestras casas a los extranjeros. \bibleverse{3} Somos
huérfanos y sin padre. Nuestras madres están como viudas. \bibleverse{4}
Hay que pagar por el agua para beber. Nos venden la madera.
\bibleverse{5} Nuestros perseguidores están en nuestro cuello. Estamos
cansados y no tenemos descanso. \bibleverse{6} Hemos entregado nuestras
manos a los egipcios, y a los asirios, que se conformen con el pan.
\bibleverse{7} Nuestros padres pecaron y ya no existen. Hemos soportado
sus iniquidades. \footnote{\textbf{5:7} Éxod 20,5; Jer 31,29; Ezeq 18,2}
\bibleverse{8} Los siervos nos gobiernan. No hay nadie que nos libere de
su mano. \bibleverse{9} Conseguimos el pan a costa de nuestra vida, a
causa de la espada en el desierto. \bibleverse{10} Nuestra piel es negra
como un horno, por el calor abrasador del hambre. \bibleverse{11}
Violaron a las mujeres en Sión, las vírgenes en las ciudades de Judá.
\bibleverse{12} Príncipes fueron colgados de las manos. Los rostros de
los ancianos no fueron honrados. \bibleverse{13} Los jóvenes llevan
piedras de molino. Los niños tropezaron bajo cargas de madera.
\bibleverse{14} Los ancianos se han retirado de la puerta, y los jóvenes
de su música. \bibleverse{15} La alegría de nuestro corazón ha cesado.
Nuestra danza se convierte en luto. \bibleverse{16} La corona ha caído
de nuestra cabeza. ¡Ay de nosotros, que hemos pecado! \footnote{\textbf{5:16}
  Jer 13,18} \bibleverse{17} Por esto nuestro corazón desfallece. Para
estas cosas nuestros ojos son débiles: \bibleverse{18} para el monte de
Sión, que está desolado. Los zorros caminan sobre ella.

\hypertarget{pide-nueva-gracia}{%
\subsection{Pide nueva gracia}\label{pide-nueva-gracia}}

\bibleverse{19} Tú, Yahvé, permaneces para siempre. Su trono es de
generación en generación. \bibleverse{20} ¿Por qué nos olvidas para
siempre? y abandonarnos durante tanto tiempo? \footnote{\textbf{5:20}
  Sal 13,1} \bibleverse{21} Vuélvenos a ti, Yahvé, y nos convertiremos.
Renueva nuestros días como antaño. \bibleverse{22} Pero nos habéis
rechazado por completo. Estáis muy enfadados con nosotros. \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Remember, Yahweh, what has come on us. Look, and see our
reproach. \bibleverse{2} Our inheritance has been turned over to
strangers, our houses to aliens. \bibleverse{3} We are orphans and
fatherless. Our mothers are as widows. \bibleverse{4} We must pay for
water to drink. Our wood is sold to us. \bibleverse{5} Our pursuers are
on our necks. We are weary, and have no rest. \bibleverse{6} We have
given our hands to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied
with bread. \bibleverse{7} Our fathers sinned, and are no more. We have
borne their iniquities. \bibleverse{8} Servants rule over us. There is
no one to deliver us out of their hand. \bibleverse{9} We get our bread
at the peril of our lives, because of the sword in the wilderness.
\bibleverse{10} Our skin is black like an oven, because of the burning
heat of famine. \bibleverse{11} They ravished the women in Zion, the
virgins in the cities of Judah. \bibleverse{12} Princes were hanged up
by their hands. The faces of elders were not honored. \bibleverse{13}
The young men carry millstones. The children stumbled under loads of
wood. \bibleverse{14} The elders have ceased from the gate, and the
young men from their music. \bibleverse{15} The joy of our heart has
ceased. Our dance is turned into mourning. \bibleverse{16} The crown has
fallen from our head. Woe to us, for we have sinned! \bibleverse{17} For
this our heart is faint. For these things our eyes are dim:
\bibleverse{18} for the mountain of Zion, which is desolate. The foxes
walk on it. \bibleverse{19} You, Yahweh, remain forever. Your throne is
from generation to generation. \bibleverse{20} Why do you forget us
forever, and forsake us for so long a time? \bibleverse{21} Turn us to
yourself, Yahweh, and we will be turned. Renew our days as of old.
\bibleverse{22} But you have utterly rejected us. You are very angry
against us. \end{otherlanguage} \end{paracol}
