\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-crianza-de-daniel-en-la-corte-pagana-de-babilonia}{%
\subsection{La crianza de Daniel en la corte pagana de
Babilonia}\label{la-crianza-de-daniel-en-la-corte-pagana-de-babilonia}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} En el tercer año del reinado de Joacim, rey de Judá,
Nabucodonosor, rey de Babilonia, llegó a Jerusalén y la sitió.
\footnote{\textbf{1:1} 2Re 24,1-2} \bibleverse{2} El Señor\footnote{\textbf{1:2}
  La palabra traducida ``Señor'' es ``Adonai''.} entregó a Joacim, rey
de Judá, con algunos de los utensilios de la casa de Dios;\footnote{\textbf{1:2}
  La palabra hebrea traducida como ``Dios'' es ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}''
  (Elohim).} y los llevó a la tierra de Sinar, a la casa de su dios.
Llevó los utensilios a la casa del tesoro de su dios.

\hypertarget{daniel-y-sus-amigos-vienen-a-babilonia-para-ser-entrenados-para-el-servicio-real}{%
\subsection{Daniel y sus amigos vienen a Babilonia para ser entrenados
para el servicio
real}\label{daniel-y-sus-amigos-vienen-a-babilonia-para-ser-entrenados-para-el-servicio-real}}

\bibleverse{3} El rey habló con Aspenaz, el maestro de sus eunucos, para
que trajera a algunos de los hijos de Israel, de la descendencia
real\footnote{\textbf{1:3} o, semilla} y de los nobles \footnote{\textbf{1:3}
  2Re 20,18} \bibleverse{4} jóvenes en los que no hubiera ningún
defecto, sino que fueran bien dotados, diestros en toda sabiduría,
dotados de conocimiento, que comprendieran la ciencia y que tuvieran la
capacidad de estar en el palacio del rey; y que les enseñara la ciencia
y la lengua de los caldeos. \bibleverse{5} El rey dispuso para ellos una
porción diaria de los manjares del rey y del vino que él bebía, y que
fueran alimentados durante tres años, para que al final de ellos
estuvieran en pie ante el rey.

\bibleverse{6} Entre estos hijos de Judá estaban Daniel, Ananías, Misael
y Azarías. \bibleverse{7} El príncipe de los eunucos les dio nombres: a
Daniel le puso el nombre de Beltsasar; a Ananías, el de Sadrac; a
Misael, el de Mesac; y a Azarías, el de Abednego.

\hypertarget{daniel-obtuvo-permiso-para-comer-alimentos-que-se-ajustan-a-la-ley-juduxeda}{%
\subsection{Daniel obtuvo permiso para comer alimentos que se ajustan a
la ley
judía}\label{daniel-obtuvo-permiso-para-comer-alimentos-que-se-ajustan-a-la-ley-juduxeda}}

\bibleverse{8} Pero Daniel se propuso en su corazón no contaminarse con
los manjares del rey ni con el vino que bebía. Por eso pidió al príncipe
de los eunucos que no se contaminara. \footnote{\textbf{1:8} Lev 11,1}
\bibleverse{9} Ahora bien, Dios hizo que Daniel encontrara bondad y
compasión a los ojos del príncipe de los eunucos. \footnote{\textbf{1:9}
  Gén 39,21} \bibleverse{10} El príncipe de los eunucos dijo a Daniel:
``Temo a mi señor el rey, que ha dispuesto tu comida y tu bebida. Pues,
¿por qué habría de ver vuestras caras más feas que las de los jóvenes de
vuestra edad? Entonces pondrías en peligro mi cabeza ante el rey''.

\bibleverse{11} Entonces Daniel dijo al mayordomo que el príncipe de los
eunucos había designado sobre Daniel, Ananías, Misael y Azarías:
\bibleverse{12} ``Te ruego que pongas a prueba a tus siervos durante
diez días, y que nos den verduras para comer y agua para beber.
\bibleverse{13} Entonces que se examinen nuestros rostros ante ti, y el
de los jóvenes que comen de los manjares del rey; y según veas, trata a
tus siervos.'' \bibleverse{14} Así que los escuchó en este asunto, y los
puso a prueba durante diez días.

\bibleverse{15} Al cabo de diez días, sus rostros parecían más hermosos
y estaban más gordos de carne que todos los jóvenes que comían de los
manjares del rey. \bibleverse{16} Entonces el mayordomo les quitó los
manjares y el vino que les habían dado de beber, y les dio verduras.

\hypertarget{el-entrenamiento-bendecido-por-dios-de-los-cuatro-amigos-y-su-aceptaciuxf3n-en-el-servicio-real}{%
\subsection{El entrenamiento bendecido por Dios de los cuatro amigos y
su aceptación en el servicio
real}\label{el-entrenamiento-bendecido-por-dios-de-los-cuatro-amigos-y-su-aceptaciuxf3n-en-el-servicio-real}}

\bibleverse{17} En cuanto a estos cuatro jóvenes, Dios les dio
conocimiento y destreza en todo tipo de aprendizaje y sabiduría; y
Daniel tuvo entendimiento en todas las visiones y sueños. \footnote{\textbf{1:17}
  Ezeq 28,3}

\bibleverse{18} Al cabo de los días que el rey había señalado para
traerlos, el príncipe de los eunucos los llevó ante Nabucodonosor.
\bibleverse{19} El rey habló con ellos, y entre todos ellos no se
encontró ninguno como Daniel, Ananías, Misael y Azarías. Por lo tanto,
se presentaron ante el rey. \bibleverse{20} En todo asunto de sabiduría
y entendimiento sobre el que el rey les preguntó, los encontró diez
veces mejores que todos los magos y encantadores que había en todo su
reino.

\bibleverse{21} Daniel continuó hasta el primer año del rey Ciro.
\footnote{\textbf{1:21} Esd 1,1}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of
Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it.
\bibleverse{2} The Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:2} The word translated
  ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand,
with some of the vessels of the house of God;\footnote{\textbf{1:2} The
  Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} and he
carried them into the land of Shinar to the house of his god. He brought
the vessels into the treasure house of his god.

\bibleverse{3} The king spoke to Ashpenaz, the master of his eunuchs,
that he should bring in some of the children of Israel, even of the
royal offspring\footnote{\textbf{1:3} or, seed} and of the nobles:
\bibleverse{4} youths in whom was no defect, but well-favored, skillful
in all wisdom, endowed with knowledge, understanding science, and who
had the ability to stand in the king's palace; and that he should teach
them the learning and the language of the Chaldeans. \bibleverse{5} The
king appointed for them a daily portion of the king's delicacies and of
the wine which he drank, and that they should be nourished three years,
that at its end they should stand before the king.

\bibleverse{6} Now among these of the children of Judah were Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. \bibleverse{7} The prince of the eunuchs
gave names to them: to Daniel he gave the name Belteshazzar; to
Hananiah, Shadrach; to Mishael, Meshach; and to Azariah, Abednego.

\bibleverse{8} But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile
himself with the king's delicacies, nor with the wine which he drank.
Therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
defile himself. \bibleverse{9} Now God made Daniel find kindness and
compassion in the sight of the prince of the eunuchs. \bibleverse{10}
The prince of the eunuchs said to Daniel, ``I fear my lord the king, who
has appointed your food and your drink. For why should he see your faces
worse looking than the youths who are of your own age? Then you would
endanger my head with the king.''

\bibleverse{11} Then Daniel said to the steward whom the prince of the
eunuchs had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:
\bibleverse{12} ``Test your servants, I beg you, ten days; and let them
give us vegetables to eat and water to drink. \bibleverse{13} Then let
our faces be examined before you, and the face of the youths who eat of
the king's delicacies; and as you see, deal with your servants.''
\bibleverse{14} So he listened to them in this matter, and tested them
for ten days.

\bibleverse{15} At the end of ten days, their faces appeared fairer and
they were fatter in flesh than all the youths who ate of the king's
delicacies. \bibleverse{16} So the steward took away their delicacies
and the wine that they were given to drink, and gave them vegetables.

\bibleverse{17} Now as for these four youths, God gave them knowledge
and skill in all learning and wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in
all visions and dreams.

\bibleverse{18} At the end of the days which the king had appointed for
bringing them in, the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before
Nebuchadnezzar. \bibleverse{19} The king talked with them; and among
them all was found no one like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.
Therefore stood they before the king. \bibleverse{20} In every matter of
wisdom and understanding concerning which the king inquired of them, he
found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters who
were in all his realm.

\bibleverse{21} Daniel continued even to the first year of King Cyrus.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-sueuxf1o-de-nabucodonosor-interpretado-por-daniel}{%
\subsection{El sueño de Nabucodonosor interpretado por
Daniel}\label{el-sueuxf1o-de-nabucodonosor-interpretado-por-daniel}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} En el segundo año del reinado de Nabucodonosor, éste soñó
sueños, y su espíritu se turbó, y se le fue el sueño. \bibleverse{2}
Entonces el rey ordenó que se llamara a los magos, a los encantadores, a
los hechiceros y a los caldeos para que le contaran al rey sus sueños.
Así que entraron y se presentaron ante el rey. \footnote{\textbf{2:2} Is
  47,12-13} \bibleverse{3} El rey les dijo: ``He soñado un sueño, y mi
espíritu está turbado por conocer el sueño''.

\bibleverse{4} Entonces los caldeos hablaron al rey en lengua siria:
``¡Oh rey, vive para siempre! Cuenta a tus siervos el sueño, y nosotros
te mostraremos la interpretación''. \footnote{\textbf{2:4} Dan 3,9}

\bibleverse{5} El rey respondió a los caldeos: ``La cosa se me ha ido de
las manos. Si no me dan a conocer el sueño y su interpretación, serán
despedazados, y sus casas serán convertidas en un estercolero.
\bibleverse{6} Pero si me muestran el sueño y su interpretación,
recibirán de mí regalos, recompensas y gran honor. Por lo tanto,
muéstrame el sueño y su interpretación''.

\bibleverse{7} Respondieron la segunda vez y dijeron: ``Que el rey
cuente el sueño a sus siervos y nosotros mostraremos la
interpretación''.

\bibleverse{8} El rey respondió: ``Sé con certeza que tratas de ganar
tiempo, porque ves que la cosa se me ha ido de las manos. \bibleverse{9}
Pero si no me das a conocer el sueño, no hay más que una ley para ti,
pues has preparado palabras mentirosas y corruptas para hablar ante mí,
hasta que la situación cambie. Por tanto, dime el sueño, y sabré que
puedes mostrarme su interpretación''.

\bibleverse{10} Los caldeos respondieron al rey y dijeron: ``No hay
hombre en la tierra que pueda mostrar el asunto del rey, porque ningún
rey, señor o gobernante ha pedido tal cosa a ningún mago, encantador o
caldeo. \bibleverse{11} Es una cosa rara la que requiere el rey, y no
hay otro que pueda mostrarla ante el rey, excepto los dioses, cuya
morada no es con la carne.''

\hypertarget{el-rey-ordena-la-ejecuciuxf3n-de-todos-los-adivinos-daniel-procura-el-aplazamiento-de-la-ejecuciuxf3n-mediante-su-promesa}{%
\subsection{El rey ordena la ejecución de todos los adivinos; Daniel
procura el aplazamiento de la ejecución mediante su
promesa}\label{el-rey-ordena-la-ejecuciuxf3n-de-todos-los-adivinos-daniel-procura-el-aplazamiento-de-la-ejecuciuxf3n-mediante-su-promesa}}

\bibleverse{12} A causa de esto, el rey se enojó y se puso muy furioso,
y ordenó que todos los sabios de Babilonia fueran destruidos.
\bibleverse{13} Así que el decreto salió, y los sabios debían ser
asesinados. Buscaron a Daniel y a sus compañeros para matarlos.

\bibleverse{14} Entonces Daniel respondió con consejo y prudencia a
Arioc, capitán de la guardia del rey, que había salido a matar a los
sabios de Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{2:14} Dan 1,17; Dan 1,20; Dan
  2,24} \bibleverse{15} El respondió a Arioc, el capitán del rey: ``¿Por
qué es tan urgente el decreto del rey?'' Entonces Arioc dio a conocer el
asunto a Daniel. \bibleverse{16} Daniel entró y pidió al rey que le
diera un plazo para mostrarle la interpretación.

\hypertarget{daniel-recibe-la-revelaciuxf3n-del-misterio-de-dios-a-travuxe9s-de-un-sueuxf1o-su-acciuxf3n-de-gracias-y-oraciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Daniel recibe la revelación del misterio de Dios a través de
un sueño; su acción de gracias y
oración}\label{daniel-recibe-la-revelaciuxf3n-del-misterio-de-dios-a-travuxe9s-de-un-sueuxf1o-su-acciuxf3n-de-gracias-y-oraciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{17} Entonces Daniel fue a su casa y dio a conocer el asunto
a Ananías, Misael y Azarías, sus compañeros \bibleverse{18} para que
pidieran misericordia al Dios del cielo respecto a este secreto, a fin
de que Daniel y sus compañeros no perecieran con el resto de los sabios
de Babilonia. \bibleverse{19} Entonces el secreto le fue revelado a
Daniel en una visión nocturna. Entonces Daniel bendijo al Dios del
cielo. \footnote{\textbf{2:19} Dan 2,30} \bibleverse{20} Daniel
respondió, ``Bendito sea el nombre de Dios por los siglos de los siglos;
porque la sabiduría y la fuerza son suyas. \bibleverse{21} Él cambia los
tiempos y las estaciones. El quita reyes y pone reyes. Él da sabiduría a
los sabios, y el conocimiento a los que tienen entendimiento.
\footnote{\textbf{2:21} Dan 4,17; Dan 4,25; Dan 4,32} \bibleverse{22} Él
revela las cosas profundas y secretas. Sabe lo que hay en la oscuridad,
y la luz habita en él. \bibleverse{23} Te doy las gracias y te alabo,
Oh, Dios de mis padres, que me han dado sabiduría y poder, y ahora me
han hecho saber lo que deseamos de ti; porque nos has dado a conocer el
asunto del rey''.

\hypertarget{daniel-le-dice-al-rey-el-contenido-del-sueuxf1o}{%
\subsection{Daniel le dice al rey el contenido del
sueño}\label{daniel-le-dice-al-rey-el-contenido-del-sueuxf1o}}

\bibleverse{24} Por lo tanto, Daniel fue a ver a Arioc, a quien el rey
había designado para destruir a los sabios de Babilonia. Fue y le dijo
lo siguiente ``No destruyas a los sabios de Babilonia. Llévame ante el
rey y le mostraré la interpretación''. \footnote{\textbf{2:24} Dan 2,14}

\bibleverse{25} Entonces Arioc llevó a Daniel ante el rey a toda prisa,
y le dijo lo siguiente ``He encontrado un hombre de los hijos del
cautiverio de Judá que dará a conocer al rey la interpretación''.

\bibleverse{26} El rey respondió a Daniel, cuyo nombre era Beltsasar:
``¿Eres capaz de darme a conocer el sueño que he visto y su
interpretación?''

\bibleverse{27} Daniel respondió ante el rey y dijo: ``El secreto que el
rey ha exigido no puede ser mostrado al rey por sabios, encantadores,
magos o adivinos; \bibleverse{28} pero hay un Dios en el cielo que
revela los secretos, y él ha dado a conocer al rey Nabucodonosor lo que
sucederá en los últimos días. Su sueño y las visiones de su cabeza en su
lecho son estos:

\bibleverse{29} ``En cuanto a ti, oh rey, tus pensamientos vinieron en
tu lecho, lo que debe suceder en adelante; y el que revela los secretos
te ha dado a conocer lo que sucederá. \footnote{\textbf{2:29} Dan 2,22}
\bibleverse{30} Pero en cuanto a mí, este secreto no me ha sido revelado
por ninguna sabiduría que yo tenga más que cualquier otro viviente, sino
con el propósito de que la interpretación sea dada a conocer al rey, y
para que tú conozcas los pensamientos de tu corazón. \footnote{\textbf{2:30}
  Gén 41,16}

\bibleverse{31} ``Tú, oh rey, viste, y he aquí,\footnote{\textbf{2:31}
  ``He aquí'', de ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', significa mirar, fijarse, observar,
  ver o contemplar. Se utiliza a menudo como interjección.} una gran
imagen. Esta imagen, que era poderosa, y cuyo brillo era excelente,
estaba delante de ti; y su aspecto era aterrador. \bibleverse{32} En
cuanto a esta imagen, su cabeza era de oro fino, su pecho y sus brazos
de plata, su vientre y sus muslos de bronce, \bibleverse{33} sus piernas
de hierro, sus pies en parte de hierro y en parte de barro.
\bibleverse{34} Viste hasta que se cortó una piedra sin manos, que
golpeó la imagen en sus pies que eran de hierro y de barro, y los hizo
pedazos. \bibleverse{35} Entonces el hierro, el barro, el bronce, la
plata y el oro se hicieron pedazos juntos, y se convirtieron en paja de
las eras de verano. El viento se los llevó, de modo que no se encontró
lugar para ellos. La piedra que golpeó la imagen se convirtió en una
gran montaña y llenó toda la tierra.

\hypertarget{la-interpretaciuxf3n-de-daniel-del-sueuxf1o}{%
\subsection{La interpretación de Daniel del
sueño}\label{la-interpretaciuxf3n-de-daniel-del-sueuxf1o}}

\bibleverse{36} ``Este es el sueño, y vamos a contar su interpretación
ante el rey. \bibleverse{37} Tú, oh rey, eres rey de reyes, a quien el
Dios del cielo ha dado el reino, el poder, la fuerza y la gloria.
\footnote{\textbf{2:37} Ezeq 26,7} \bibleverse{38} Dondequiera que
habiten los hijos de los hombres, él ha entregado en tu mano los
animales del campo y las aves del cielo, y te ha hecho gobernar sobre
todos ellos. Tú eres la cabeza de oro. \footnote{\textbf{2:38} Jer 27,6}

\bibleverse{39} ``Después de ti, se levantará otro reino inferior a ti;
y otro tercer reino de bronce, que dominará toda la tierra.
\bibleverse{40} El cuarto reino será fuerte como el hierro, porque el
hierro rompe en pedazos y somete todas las cosas; y como el hierro que
aplasta a todos estos, se romperá en pedazos y aplastará.
\bibleverse{41} Como viste los pies y los dedos de los pies, en parte de
barro de alfarero y en parte de hierro, será un reino dividido; pero
habrá en él de la fuerza del hierro, porque viste el hierro mezclado con
barro cenagoso. \bibleverse{42} Como los dedos de los pies eran en parte
de hierro y en parte de barro, así el reino será en parte fuerte y en
parte frágil. \bibleverse{43} Mientras que viste el hierro mezclado con
el barro mirífico, se mezclarán con la semilla de los hombres; pero no
se pegarán unos a otros, como el hierro no se mezcla con el barro.

\bibleverse{44} ``En los días de esos reyes, el Dios del cielo
establecerá un reino que nunca será destruido, ni su soberanía será
dejada a otro pueblo; sino que romperá en pedazos y consumirá todos
estos reinos, y permanecerá para siempre. \footnote{\textbf{2:44} Dan
  7,14; Dan 7,27; Is 9,7; 1Cor 15,24; Apoc 11,15} \bibleverse{45} Porque
viste que una piedra fue cortada de la montaña sin manos, y que hizo
pedazos el hierro, el bronce, el barro, la plata y el oro, el gran Dios
ha dado a conocer al rey lo que sucederá en adelante. El sueño es
cierto, y su interpretación segura''. \footnote{\textbf{2:45} Dan 2,34}

\hypertarget{el-reconocimiento-de-nabucodonosor-de-la-grandeza-del-dios-de-los-juduxedos-donaciuxf3n-y-homenaje-a-daniel}{%
\subsection{El reconocimiento de Nabucodonosor de la grandeza del Dios
de los judíos; Donación y homenaje a
Daniel}\label{el-reconocimiento-de-nabucodonosor-de-la-grandeza-del-dios-de-los-juduxedos-donaciuxf3n-y-homenaje-a-daniel}}

\bibleverse{46} Entonces el rey Nabucodonosor se postró sobre su rostro,
adoró a Daniel y ordenó que le ofrecieran una ofrenda y dulces olores.
\bibleverse{47} El rey respondió a Daniel y le dijo: ``En verdad, tu
Dios es el Dios de los dioses, y el Señor de los reyes, y un revelador
de secretos, ya que has podido revelar este secreto.'' \footnote{\textbf{2:47}
  Dan 3,29; Jos 2,11; Sal 86,8; Is 42,8-9}

\bibleverse{48} Entonces el rey engrandeció a Daniel y le dio muchos y
grandes regalos, y lo puso a gobernar toda la provincia de Babilonia y a
ser gobernador principal de todos los sabios de Babilonia. \footnote{\textbf{2:48}
  Dan 2,6} \bibleverse{49} Daniel pidió al rey que nombrara a Sadrac,
Mesac y Abednego sobre los asuntos de la provincia de Babilonia, pero
Daniel estaba en la puerta del rey. \footnote{\textbf{2:49} Dan 3,12}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} In the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar,
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams; and his spirit was troubled, and his
sleep went from him. \bibleverse{2} Then the king commanded that the
magicians, the enchanters, the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans be called to
tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king.
\bibleverse{3} The king said to them, ``I have dreamed a dream, and my
spirit is troubled to know the dream.''

\bibleverse{4} Then the Chaldeans spoke to the king in the Syrian
language, ``O king, live forever! Tell your servants the dream, and we
will show the interpretation.''

\bibleverse{5} The king answered the Chaldeans, ``The thing has gone
from me. If you don't make known to me the dream and its interpretation,
you will be cut in pieces, and your houses will be made a dunghill.
\bibleverse{6} But if you show the dream and its interpretation, you
will receive from me gifts, rewards, and great honor. Therefore show me
the dream and its interpretation.''

\bibleverse{7} They answered the second time and said, ``Let the king
tell his servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.''

\bibleverse{8} The king answered, ``I know of a certainty that you are
trying to gain time, because you see the thing has gone from me.
\bibleverse{9} But if you don't make known to me the dream, there is but
one law for you; for you have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak
before me, until the situation changes. Therefore tell me the dream, and
I will know that you can show me its interpretation.''

\bibleverse{10} The Chaldeans answered the king and said, ``There is not
a man on the earth who can show the king's matter, because no king,
lord, or ruler has asked such a thing of any magician, enchanter, or
Chaldean. \bibleverse{11} It is a rare thing that the king requires, and
there is no other who can show it before the king except the gods, whose
dwelling is not with flesh.''

\bibleverse{12} Because of this, the king was angry and very furious,
and commanded that all the wise men of Babylon be destroyed.
\bibleverse{13} So the decree went out, and the wise men were to be
slain. They sought Daniel and his companions to be slain.

\bibleverse{14} Then Daniel returned answer with counsel and prudence to
Arioch the captain of the king's guard, who had gone out to kill the
wise men of Babylon. \bibleverse{15} He answered Arioch the king's
captain, ``Why is the decree so urgent from the king?'' Then Arioch made
the thing known to Daniel. \bibleverse{16} Daniel went in, and desired
of the king that he would appoint him a time, and he would show the king
the interpretation.

\bibleverse{17} Then Daniel went to his house and made the thing known
to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions: \bibleverse{18} that
they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret,
that Daniel and his companions would not perish with the rest of the
wise men of Babylon. \bibleverse{19} Then the secret was revealed to
Daniel in a vision of the night. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
\bibleverse{20} Daniel answered, ``Blessed be the name of God forever
and ever; for wisdom and might are his. \bibleverse{21} He changes the
times and the seasons. He removes kings and sets up kings. He gives
wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to those who have understanding.
\bibleverse{22} He reveals the deep and secret things. He knows what is
in the darkness, and the light dwells with him. \bibleverse{23} I thank
you and praise you, O God of my fathers, who have given me wisdom and
might, and have now made known to me what we desired of you; for you
have made known to us the king's matter.''

\bibleverse{24} Therefore Daniel went in to Arioch, whom the king had
appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon. He went and said this to
him: ``Don't destroy the wise men of Babylon. Bring me in before the
king, and I will show to the king the interpretation.''

\bibleverse{25} Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste,
and said this to him: ``I have found a man of the children of the
captivity of Judah who will make known to the king the interpretation.''

\bibleverse{26} The king answered Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar,
``Are you able to make known to me the dream which I have seen, and its
interpretation?''

\bibleverse{27} Daniel answered before the king, and said, ``The secret
which the king has demanded can't be shown to the king by wise men,
enchanters, magicians, or soothsayers; \bibleverse{28} but there is a
God in heaven who reveals secrets, and he has made known to King
Nebuchadnezzar what will be in the latter days. Your dream and the
visions of your head on your bed are these:

\bibleverse{29} ``As for you, O king, your thoughts came on your bed,
what should happen hereafter; and he who reveals secrets has made known
to you what will happen. \bibleverse{30} But as for me, this secret is
not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but
to the intent that the interpretation may be made known to the king, and
that you may know the thoughts of your heart.

\bibleverse{31} ``You, O king, saw, and behold,\footnote{\textbf{2:31}
  ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} a
great image. This image, which was mighty, and whose brightness was
excellent, stood before you; and its appearance was terrifying.
\bibleverse{32} As for this image, its head was of fine gold, its breast
and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of bronze,
\bibleverse{33} its legs of iron, its feet part of iron and part of
clay. \bibleverse{34} You saw until a stone was cut out without hands,
which struck the image on its feet that were of iron and clay, and broke
them in pieces. \bibleverse{35} Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the
silver, and the gold were broken in pieces together, and became like the
chaff of the summer threshing floors. The wind carried them away, so
that no place was found for them. The stone that struck the image became
a great mountain and filled the whole earth.

\bibleverse{36} ``This is the dream; and we will tell its interpretation
before the king. \bibleverse{37} You, O king, are king of kings, to whom
the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, the strength, and
the glory. \bibleverse{38} Wherever the children of men dwell, he has
given the animals of the field and the birds of the sky into your hand,
and has made you rule over them all. You are the head of gold.

\bibleverse{39} ``After you, another kingdom will arise that is inferior
to you; and another third kingdom of bronze, which will rule over all
the earth. \bibleverse{40} The fourth kingdom will be strong as iron,
because iron breaks in pieces and subdues all things; and as iron that
crushes all these, it will break in pieces and crush. \bibleverse{41}
Whereas you saw the feet and toes, part of potters' clay and part of
iron, it will be a divided kingdom; but there will be in it of the
strength of the iron, because you saw the iron mixed with miry clay.
\bibleverse{42} As the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of
clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly brittle.
\bibleverse{43} Whereas you saw the iron mixed with miry clay, they will
mingle themselves with the seed of men; but they won't cling to one
another, even as iron does not mix with clay.

\bibleverse{44} ``In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set
up a kingdom which will never be destroyed, nor will its sovereignty be
left to another people; but it will break in pieces and consume all
these kingdoms, and it will stand forever. \bibleverse{45} Because you
saw that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it
broke in pieces the iron, the bronze, the clay, the silver, and the
gold, the great God has made known to the king what will happen
hereafter. The dream is certain, and its interpretation sure.''

\bibleverse{46} Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face, worshiped
Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an offering and sweet odors
to him. \bibleverse{47} The king answered to Daniel, and said, ``Of a
truth your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and a revealer
of secrets, since you have been able to reveal this secret.''

\bibleverse{48} Then the king made Daniel great and gave him many great
gifts, and made him rule over the whole province of Babylon and to be
chief governor over all the wise men of Babylon. \bibleverse{49} Daniel
requested of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
over the affairs of the province of Babylon, but Daniel was in the
king's gate.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{nabucodonosor-hace-levantar-un-uxeddolo-y-ordena-su-adoraciuxf3n-sobre-el-castigo-de-muerte-por-fuego}{%
\subsection{Nabucodonosor hace levantar un ídolo y ordena su adoración
sobre el castigo de muerte por
fuego}\label{nabucodonosor-hace-levantar-un-uxeddolo-y-ordena-su-adoraciuxf3n-sobre-el-castigo-de-muerte-por-fuego}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} El rey Nabucodonosor hizo una imagen de oro, cuya altura
era de sesenta codos\footnote{\textbf{3:1} Un codo es la longitud desde
  la punta del dedo corazón hasta el codo del brazo de un hombre, es
  decir, unas 18 pulgadas o 46 centímetros.} y su anchura de seis codos.
La colocó en la llanura de Dura, en la provincia de Babilonia.
\bibleverse{2} Entonces el rey Nabucodonosor envió a reunir a los
gobernadores locales, a los diputados y a los gobernadores, a los
jueces, a los tesoreros, a los consejeros, a los alguaciles y a todos
los gobernantes de las provincias, para que vinieran a la dedicación de
la imagen que el rey Nabucodonosor había erigido. \bibleverse{3}
Entonces se reunieron los gobernadores locales, los diputados y los
gobernadores, los jueces, los tesoreros, los consejeros, los alguaciles
y todos los gobernantes de las provincias para venir a la dedicación de
la imagen que el rey Nabucodonosor había erigido; y se pusieron de pie
ante la imagen que Nabucodonosor había erigido.

\bibleverse{4} Entonces el heraldo gritó en voz alta: ``A vosotros se os
ordena, pueblos, naciones y lenguas, \bibleverse{5} que siempre que
oigáis el sonido del cuerno, de la flauta, de la cítara, de la lira, del
arpa, de la flauta y de toda clase de música, os postréis y adoréis la
imagen de oro que el rey Nabucodonosor ha levantado. \bibleverse{6} El
que no se postre y adore será arrojado en el centro de un horno de fuego
ardiente en la misma hora.''

\bibleverse{7} Por eso, en aquel momento, cuando todos los pueblos
oyeron el sonido del cuerno, la flauta, la cítara, la lira, el arpa, la
flauta y toda clase de música, todos los pueblos, las naciones y las
lenguas se postraron y adoraron la imagen de oro que el rey
Nabucodonosor había levantado.

\hypertarget{los-tres-amigos-de-daniel-se-niegan-a-adorar-la-imagen}{%
\subsection{Los tres amigos de Daniel se niegan a adorar la
imagen}\label{los-tres-amigos-de-daniel-se-niegan-a-adorar-la-imagen}}

\bibleverse{8} Por lo tanto, en ese momento se acercaron ciertos caldeos
y presentaron una acusación contra los judíos. \bibleverse{9} Ellos
respondieron al rey Nabucodonosor: ``¡Oh rey, vive para siempre!
\bibleverse{10} Tú, oh rey, has decretado que todo hombre que oiga el
sonido del cuerno, de la flauta, de la cítara, de la lira, del arpa, de
la flauta y de toda clase de música, se postrará y adorará la imagen de
oro; \footnote{\textbf{3:10} Dan 6,12} \bibleverse{11} y el que no se
postule y adore será arrojado en medio de un horno de fuego ardiente.
\bibleverse{12} Hay ciertos judíos a quienes has designado sobre los
asuntos de la provincia de Babilonia: Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego. Estos
hombres, oh rey, no te han respetado. No sirven a tus dioses y no adoran
la imagen de oro que has levantado''. \footnote{\textbf{3:12} Dan 2,49}

\bibleverse{13} Entonces Nabucodonosor, furioso y enojado, mandó traer a
Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego. Entonces estos hombres fueron llevados ante el
rey. \bibleverse{14} Nabucodonosor les respondió: ``¿Es cierto, Sadrac,
Mesac y Abednego, que no servís a mis dioses y no adoráis la imagen de
oro que he levantado? \bibleverse{15} Ahora bien, si estáis dispuestos,
siempre que oigáis el sonido del cuerno, de la flauta, de la cítara, de
la lira, del arpa, de la flauta y de toda clase de música, a postraros y
adorar la imagen que he hecho, bien; pero si no adoráis, seréis
arrojados en la misma hora en medio de un horno de fuego ardiente.
¿Quién es ese dios que os librará de mis manos?'' \footnote{\textbf{3:15}
  2Re 18,35}

\bibleverse{16} Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego respondieron al rey:
``Nabucodonosor, no tenemos necesidad de responderte en este asunto.
\bibleverse{17} Si sucede, nuestro Dios, a quien servimos, es capaz de
librarnos del horno de fuego ardiente, y él nos librará de tu mano, oh
rey. \footnote{\textbf{3:17} Sal 66,12} \bibleverse{18} Pero si no es
así, que sepas, oh rey, que no serviremos a tus dioses ni adoraremos la
imagen de oro que has levantado.'' \footnote{\textbf{3:18} Éxod 20,3-5}

\hypertarget{arrojados-al-horno-los-tres-hombres-quedan-ilesos}{%
\subsection{Arrojados al horno, los tres hombres quedan
ilesos}\label{arrojados-al-horno-los-tres-hombres-quedan-ilesos}}

\bibleverse{19} Entonces Nabucodonosor se llenó de furia, y la forma de
su apariencia cambió contra Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego. Habló y ordenó que
calentaran el horno siete veces más de lo que solía calentarse.
\bibleverse{20} Ordenó a algunos hombres poderosos que estaban en su
ejército que ataran a Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego y los arrojaran al horno
de fuego ardiente. \bibleverse{21} Entonces estos hombres fueron atados
con sus pantalones, sus túnicas, sus mantos y sus otras ropas, y fueron
arrojados en medio del horno de fuego ardiente. \bibleverse{22} Por lo
tanto, como la orden del rey era urgente y el horno estaba muy caliente,
la llama del fuego mató a los hombres que llevaron a Sadrac, Mesac y
Abednego. \bibleverse{23} Estos tres hombres, Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego,
cayeron atados en medio del horno de fuego ardiente.

\bibleverse{24} Entonces el rey Nabucodonosor se asombró y se levantó
apresuradamente. Habló y dijo a sus consejeros: ``¿No echamos a tres
hombres atados en medio del fuego?''. Respondieron al rey: ``Cierto, oh
rey''.

\bibleverse{25} Él respondió: ``Mira, veo a cuatro hombres sueltos,
caminando en medio del fuego, y están ilesos. El aspecto del cuarto es
como un hijo de los dioses.\footnote{\textbf{3:25} O, el Hijo de Dios.}
'' \footnote{\textbf{3:25} Is 43,2; Dan 3,28}

\hypertarget{el-rey-reconoce-la-grandeza-del-dios-de-los-juduxedos-ordena-su-honor-y-confirma-a-los-tres-amigos-de-daniel-en-su-alto-cargo}{%
\subsection{El rey reconoce la grandeza del Dios de los judíos, ordena
su honor y confirma a los tres amigos de Daniel en su alto
cargo}\label{el-rey-reconoce-la-grandeza-del-dios-de-los-juduxedos-ordena-su-honor-y-confirma-a-los-tres-amigos-de-daniel-en-su-alto-cargo}}

\bibleverse{26} Entonces Nabucodonosor se acercó a la boca del horno de
fuego ardiente. Habló y dijo: ``¡Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego, siervos del
Dios Altísimo, salid y venid aquí!'' Entonces Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego
salieron de en medio del fuego. \bibleverse{27} Los gobernadores
locales, los diputados y los gobernadores, y los consejeros del rey,
estando reunidos, vieron a estos hombres, que el fuego no tenía poder
sobre sus cuerpos. El cabello de sus cabezas no se chamuscó. Sus
pantalones no estaban cambiados. El olor del fuego ni siquiera estaba en
ellos. \footnote{\textbf{3:27} Heb 11,34}

\bibleverse{28} Nabucodonosor habló y dijo: ``Bendito sea el Dios de
Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego, que ha enviado a su ángel y ha librado a sus
siervos que confiaron en él, y han cambiado la palabra del rey, y han
entregado sus cuerpos, para no servir ni adorar a ningún dios, excepto a
su propio Dios. \footnote{\textbf{3:28} Dan 6,22} \bibleverse{29} Por lo
tanto, decreto que todo pueblo, nación y lengua que hable algo malo
contra el Dios de Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego sea despedazado, y sus casas
sean convertidas en un muladar, porque no hay otro dios que pueda librar
como éste.'' \footnote{\textbf{3:29} Dan 2,47}

\bibleverse{30} Entonces el rey ascendió a Sadrac, Mesac y Abednego en
la provincia de Babilonia.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose
height was sixty cubits\footnote{\textbf{3:1} A cubit is the length from
  the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man's arm, or about 18
  inches or 46 centimeters.} and its width six cubits. He set it up in
the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. \bibleverse{2} Then
Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the local governors, the
deputies, and the governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors,
the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the
dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
\bibleverse{3} Then the local governors, the deputies, and the
governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the sheriffs, and
all the rulers of the provinces were gathered together to the dedication
of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood
before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

\bibleverse{4} Then the herald cried aloud, ``To you it is commanded,
peoples, nations, and languages, \bibleverse{5} that whenever you hear
the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe, and all kinds of
music, you fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar
the king has set up. \bibleverse{6} Whoever doesn't fall down and
worship shall be cast into the middle of a burning fiery furnace the
same hour.''

\bibleverse{7} Therefore at that time, when all the peoples heard the
sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe, and all kinds of
music, all the peoples, the nations, and the languages fell down and
worshiped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

\bibleverse{8} Therefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near and
brought accusation against the Jews. \bibleverse{9} They answered
Nebuchadnezzar the king, ``O king, live for ever! \bibleverse{10} You, O
king, have made a decree that every man who hears the sound of the horn,
flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe, and all kinds of music shall fall down
and worship the golden image; \bibleverse{11} and whoever doesn't fall
down and worship shall be cast into the middle of a burning fiery
furnace. \bibleverse{12} There are certain Jews whom you have appointed
over the affairs of the province of Babylon: Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego. These men, O king, have not respected you. They don't serve
your gods, and don't worship the golden image which you have set up.''

\bibleverse{13} Then Nebuchadnezzar in rage and fury commanded that
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego be brought. Then these men were brought
before the king. \bibleverse{14} Nebuchadnezzar answered them, ``Is it
true, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you don't serve my gods and
you don't worship the golden image which I have set up? \bibleverse{15}
Now if you are ready whenever you hear the sound of the horn, flute,
zither, lyre, harp, pipe, and all kinds of music to fall down and
worship the image which I have made, good; but if you don't worship, you
shall be cast the same hour into the middle of a burning fiery furnace.
Who is that god who will deliver you out of my hands?''

\bibleverse{16} Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered the king,
``Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter.
\bibleverse{17} If it happens, our God whom we serve is able to deliver
us from the burning fiery furnace; and he will deliver us out of your
hand, O king. \bibleverse{18} But if not, let it be known to you, O
king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the golden image which
you have set up.''

\bibleverse{19} Then Nebuchadnezzar was full of fury, and the form of
his appearance was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He
spoke, and commanded that they should heat the furnace seven times more
than it was usually heated. \bibleverse{20} He commanded certain mighty
men who were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to
cast them into the burning fiery furnace. \bibleverse{21} Then these men
were bound in their pants, their tunics, and their mantles, and their
other clothes, and were cast into the middle of the burning fiery
furnace. \bibleverse{22} Therefore because the king's commandment was
urgent and the furnace exceedingly hot, the flame of the fire killed
those men who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. \bibleverse{23}
These three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into
the middle of the burning fiery furnace.

\bibleverse{24} Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonished and rose up
in haste. He spoke and said to his counselors, ``Didn't we cast three
men bound into the middle of the fire?''

They answered the king, ``True, O king.''

\bibleverse{25} He answered, ``Look, I see four men loose, walking in
the middle of the fire, and they are unharmed. The appearance of the
fourth is like a son of the gods.\footnote{\textbf{3:25} Or, the Son of
  God.} ''

\bibleverse{26} Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the
burning fiery furnace. He spoke and said, ``Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, you servants of the Most High God, come out, and come here!''

Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of the middle of the fire.
\bibleverse{27} The local governors, the deputies, and the governors,
and the king's counselors, being gathered together, saw these men, that
the fire had no power on their bodies. The hair of their head wasn't
singed. Their pants weren't changed. The smell of fire wasn't even on
them.

\bibleverse{28} Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, ``Blessed be the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his angel and delivered
his servants who trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and
have yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god
except their own God. \bibleverse{29} Therefore I make a decree that
every people, nation, and language which speak anything evil against the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego shall be cut in pieces, and their
houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other god who is
able to deliver like this.''

\bibleverse{30} Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
in the province of Babylon.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-segundo-sueuxf1o-de-nabucodonosor-su-humillaciuxf3n-y-exaltaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{El segundo sueño de Nabucodonosor, su humillación y
exaltación}\label{el-segundo-sueuxf1o-de-nabucodonosor-su-humillaciuxf3n-y-exaltaciuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} El rey Nabucodonosor, a todos los pueblos, naciones y
lenguas que habitan en toda la tierra: Que la paz se multiplique para
ti. \bibleverse{2} Me ha parecido bien mostrar las señales y los
prodigios que el Dios Altísimo ha hecho conmigo. \bibleverse{3} ¡Qué
grandes son sus signos! ¡Qué poderosas son sus maravillas! Su reino es
un reino eterno. Su dominio es de generación en generación. \footnote{\textbf{4:3}
  Dan 6,26} \bibleverse{4} Yo, Nabucodonosor, estaba tranquilo en mi
casa y floreciente en mi palacio. \bibleverse{5} Vi un sueño que me hizo
temer, y los pensamientos de mi cama y las visiones de mi cabeza me
turbaron. \bibleverse{6} Por lo tanto, decreté traer a todos los sabios
de Babilonia ante mí, para que me dieran a conocer la interpretación del
sueño. \bibleverse{7} Entonces entraron los magos, los encantadores, los
caldeos y los adivinos; y les conté el sueño, pero no me dieron a
conocer su interpretación. \footnote{\textbf{4:7} Dan 2,2}
\bibleverse{8} Pero al fin entró ante mí Daniel, cuyo nombre era
Beltsasar, según el nombre de mi dios, y en quien está el espíritu de
los dioses santos. Conté el sueño ante él, diciendo \footnote{\textbf{4:8}
  Dan 5,11; Dan 5,14} \bibleverse{9} ``Beltsasar, maestro de los magos,
porque sé que el espíritu de los dioses santos está en ti y que ningún
secreto te perturba, cuéntame las visiones de mi sueño que he visto y su
interpretación. \footnote{\textbf{4:9} Ezeq 28,3}

\hypertarget{nabucodonosor-comparte-el-sueuxf1o-con-daniel}{%
\subsection{Nabucodonosor comparte el sueño con
Daniel}\label{nabucodonosor-comparte-el-sueuxf1o-con-daniel}}

\bibleverse{10} Estas fueron las visiones de mi cabeza en mi lecho: Vi,
y he aquí un árbol en medio de la tierra; y su altura era grande.
\footnote{\textbf{4:10} Ezeq 31,3-14} \bibleverse{11} El árbol crecía y
era fuerte. Su altura llegaba hasta el cielo y su vista hasta el final
de toda la tierra. \bibleverse{12} Sus hojas eran hermosas y tenía mucho
fruto, y en él había alimento para todos. Los animales del campo tenían
sombra bajo él, y las aves del cielo vivían en sus ramas, y toda carne
se alimentaba de él. \footnote{\textbf{4:12} Dan 4,21; Ezeq 17,23}
\bibleverse{13} ``Vi en las visiones de mi cabeza en mi cama, y he aquí
que un santo vigilante bajó del cielo. \bibleverse{14} Gritó en voz alta
y dijo esto `¡Derriben el árbol y corten sus ramas! Sacudan sus hojas y
esparzan sus frutos. Que los animales se alejen de él y los pájaros de
sus ramas. \footnote{\textbf{4:14} Dan 4,23} \bibleverse{15} Sin
embargo, deja el muñón de sus raíces en la tierra, con una banda de
hierro y bronce, en la hierba tierna del campo; y que se moje con el
rocío del cielo. Que su parte sea con los animales en la hierba de la
tierra. \bibleverse{16} Que su corazón sea cambiado del de los hombres,
y que se le dé un corazón de animal. Entonces que pasen sobre él siete
tiempos. \footnote{\textbf{4:16} Dan 7,25} \bibleverse{17} ``\,`La
sentencia es por decreto de los vigilantes y la demanda por palabra de
los santos, con el fin de que los vivos sepan que el Altísimo gobierna
en el reino de los hombres, y lo da a quien quiere, y pone sobre él a
los más bajos de los hombres.' \footnote{\textbf{4:17} Dan 2,21}
\bibleverse{18} ``Este sueño lo he visto yo, el rey Nabucodonosor, y tú,
Beltsasar, declara la interpretación, porque todos los sabios de mi
reino no son capaces de darme a conocer la interpretación, pero tú sí,
porque el espíritu de los dioses santos está en ti.''

\hypertarget{la-consternaciuxf3n-de-daniel-y-la-interpretaciuxf3n-del-sueuxf1o}{%
\subsection{La consternación de Daniel y la interpretación del
sueño}\label{la-consternaciuxf3n-de-daniel-y-la-interpretaciuxf3n-del-sueuxf1o}}

\bibleverse{19} Entonces Daniel, cuyo nombre era Beltsasar, se quedó
mudo por un momento, y sus pensamientos lo perturbaron. El rey
respondió: ``Beltsasar, no dejes que el sueño o la interpretación te
perturben''. Beltsasar respondió: ``Señor mío, que el sueño sea para los
que te odian, y su interpretación para tus adversarios. \bibleverse{20}
El árbol que viste, que crecía y era fuerte, cuya altura llegaba al
cielo y su vista a toda la tierra; \bibleverse{21} cuyas hojas eran
hermosas y su fruto abundante, y en él había alimento para todos; bajo
el cual vivían los animales del campo, y en cuyas ramas tenían su morada
las aves del cielo --- \bibleverse{22} eres tú, oh rey, el que ha
crecido y se ha hecho fuerte; pues tu grandeza ha crecido, y llega hasta
el cielo, y tu dominio hasta el fin de la tierra. \bibleverse{23}
``Mientras que el rey vio a un santo vigilante que bajaba del cielo y
decía: `Corta el árbol y destrúyelo; sin embargo, deja el muñón de sus
raíces en la tierra, con una banda de hierro y bronce, en la hierba
tierna del campo, y que se moje con el rocío del cielo. Que su parte sea
con los animales del campo, hasta que pasen siete tiempos sobre él'.
\bibleverse{24} ``Esta es la interpretación, oh rey, y es el decreto del
Altísimo que ha caído sobre mi señor el rey:

\hypertarget{el-cumplimiento-de-todas-las-profecuxedas-de-daniel-la-arrogancia-de-nabucodonosor-desprecio-por-el-espuxedritu-conversiuxf3n-restauraciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{El cumplimiento de todas las profecías de Daniel: la
arrogancia de Nabucodonosor, desprecio por el espíritu, conversión,
restauración}\label{el-cumplimiento-de-todas-las-profecuxedas-de-daniel-la-arrogancia-de-nabucodonosor-desprecio-por-el-espuxedritu-conversiuxf3n-restauraciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{25} Serás expulsado de los hombres y tu morada será con los
animales del campo. Se te hará comer hierba como a los bueyes, y te
mojarás con el rocío del cielo, y pasarán siete veces sobre ti, hasta
que sepas que el Altísimo gobierna en el reino de los hombres y lo da a
quien él quiere. \bibleverse{26} Mientras que se ordenó dejar el tronco
de las raíces del árbol, tu reino te será seguro después de que sepas
que el Altísimo gobierna. \bibleverse{27} Por lo tanto, oh rey, que mi
consejo te sea aceptable, y rompe tus pecados con la justicia, y tus
iniquidades mostrando misericordia a los pobres. Tal vez se prolongue tu
tranquilidad''. \footnote{\textbf{4:27} Prov 19,17; Mat 5,7; Mat 19,21}
\bibleverse{28} Todo esto le ocurrió al rey Nabucodonosor.
\bibleverse{29} Al cabo de doce meses se paseaba por el palacio real de
Babilonia. \bibleverse{30} El rey habló y dijo: ``¿No es ésta la gran
Babilonia que he construido para morada real con la fuerza de mi poder y
para gloria de mi majestad?'' \footnote{\textbf{4:30} Prov 16,18; Hech
  12,23} \bibleverse{31} Mientras la palabra estaba en la boca del rey,
una voz vino del cielo, diciendo: ``Oh rey Nabucodonosor, a ti se te ha
dicho: `El reino se ha alejado de ti. \bibleverse{32} Serás expulsado de
los hombres y tu morada será con los animales del campo. Se te hará
comer hierba como a los bueyes. Siete tiempos pasarán sobre ti, hasta
que sepas que el Altísimo gobierna en el reino de los hombres, y lo da a
quien él quiere'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{4:32} Dan 5,21} \bibleverse{33}
Esto se cumplió en la misma hora sobre Nabucodonosor. Fue expulsado de
los hombres y comió hierba como los bueyes; y su cuerpo se mojó con el
rocío del cielo hasta que su pelo creció como las plumas de las águilas,
y sus uñas como las garras de las aves. \bibleverse{34} Al final de los
días yo, Nabucodonosor, levanté mis ojos al cielo, y mi entendimiento
volvió a mí; y bendije al Altísimo, y alabé y honré al que vive para
siempre, porque su dominio es un dominio eterno, y su reino de
generación en generación. \footnote{\textbf{4:34} Dan 4,3}
\bibleverse{35} Todos los habitantes de la tierra son reputados como
nada; y hace según su voluntad en el ejército del cielo, y entre los
habitantes de la tierra; y nadie puede detener su mano, o preguntarle:
``¿Qué estás haciendo?'' \bibleverse{36} Al mismo tiempo, mi
entendimiento volvió a mí; y por la gloria de mi reino, mi majestad y
brillo volvieron a mí. Mis consejeros y mis señores me buscaron; y fui
establecido en mi reino, y se me añadió una grandeza excelente.

\hypertarget{el-decreto-termina-con-alabanza-por-la-grandeza-de-dios}{%
\subsection{El decreto termina con alabanza por la grandeza de
Dios}\label{el-decreto-termina-con-alabanza-por-la-grandeza-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{37} Ahora yo, Nabucodonosor, alabo, ensalzo y honro al Rey
de los cielos; porque todas sus obras son verdades, y sus caminos,
justicia; y puede abatir a los que andan con soberbia. \footnote{\textbf{4:37}
  Dan 5,20; Luc 1,51; Luc 18,14}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\emph{i1}\\
\bibleverse{1} Nebuchadnezzar the king,

i1 to all the peoples, nations, and languages, who dwell in all the
earth:

i1 Peace be multiplied to you.

i1 \bibleverse{2} It has seemed good to me to show the signs and wonders
that the Most High God has worked toward me. \bibleverse{3} How great
are his signs! How mighty are his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom. His dominion is from generation to generation.

i1 \bibleverse{4} I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my house, and
flourishing in my palace. \bibleverse{5} I saw a dream which made me
afraid; and the thoughts on my bed and the visions of my head troubled
me. \bibleverse{6} Therefore I made a decree to bring in all the wise
men of Babylon before me, that they might make known to me the
interpretation of the dream. \bibleverse{7} Then the magicians, the
enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers came in; and I told them
the dream, but they didn't make known to me its interpretation.
\bibleverse{8} But at last, Daniel came in before me, whose name was
Belteshazzar according to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit
of the holy gods. I told the dream before him, saying,

i1 \bibleverse{9} ``Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I
know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and no secret troubles
you, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and its
interpretation. \bibleverse{10} These were the visions of my head on my
bed: I saw, and behold, a tree in the middle of the earth; and its
height was great. \bibleverse{11} The tree grew and was strong. Its
height reached to the sky and its sight to the end of all the earth.
\bibleverse{12} Its leaves were beautiful, and it had much fruit, and in
it was food for all. The animals of the field had shade under it, and
the birds of the sky lived in its branches, and all flesh was fed from
it.

i1 \bibleverse{13} ``I saw in the visions of my head on my bed, and
behold, a holy watcher came down from the sky. \bibleverse{14} He cried
aloud and said this: `Cut down the tree, and cut off its branches! Shake
off its leaves and scatter its fruit! Let the animals get away from
under it and the birds from its branches. \bibleverse{15} Nevertheless
leave the stump of its roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and
bronze, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew
of the sky. Let his portion be with the animals in the grass of the
earth. \bibleverse{16} Let his heart be changed from man's, and let an
animal's heart be given to him. Then let seven times pass over him.

i1 \bibleverse{17} ``\,`The sentence is by the decree of the watchers
and the demand by the word of the holy ones, to the intent that the
living may know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomever he will, and sets up over it the lowest of men.'

i1 \bibleverse{18} ``This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, have seen; and
you, Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation, because all the wise men
of my kingdom are not able to make known to me the interpretation; but
you are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in you.''

i1 \bibleverse{19} Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was
stricken mute for a while, and his thoughts troubled him. The king
answered, ``Belteshazzar, don't let the dream or the interpretation,
trouble you.''

i1 Belteshazzar answered, ``My lord, may the dream be for those who hate
you, and its interpretation to your adversaries. \bibleverse{20} The
tree that you saw, which grew and was strong, whose height reached to
the sky and its sight to all the earth; \bibleverse{21} whose leaves
were beautiful and its fruit plentiful, and in it was food for all;
under which the animals of the field lived, and on whose branches the
birds of the sky had their habitation--- \bibleverse{22} it is you, O
king, that have grown and become strong; for your greatness has grown,
and reaches to the sky, and your dominion to the end of the earth.

i1 \bibleverse{23} ``Whereas the king saw a holy watcher coming down
from the sky and saying, `Cut down the tree, and destroy it;
nevertheless leave the stump of its roots in the earth, even with a band
of iron and bronze, in the tender grass of the field, and let it be wet
with the dew of the sky. Let his portion be with the animals of the
field, until seven times pass over him.'

i1 \bibleverse{24} ``This is the interpretation, O king, and it is the
decree of the Most High, which has come on my lord the king:
\bibleverse{25} You will be driven from men and your dwelling shall be
with the animals of the field. You will be made to eat grass as oxen,
and will be wet with the dew of the sky, and seven times shall pass over
you, until you know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomever he will. \bibleverse{26} Whereas it was commanded
to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, your kingdom shall be sure
to you after you know that Heavens rules. \bibleverse{27} Therefore, O
king, let my counsel be acceptable to you, and break off your sins by
righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Perhaps
there may be a lengthening of your tranquility.''

i1 \bibleverse{28} All this came on the King Nebuchadnezzar.
\bibleverse{29} At the end of twelve months he was walking in the royal
palace of Babylon. \bibleverse{30} The king spoke and said, ``Is not
this great Babylon, which I have built for the royal dwelling place by
the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?''

i1 \bibleverse{31} While the word was in the king's mouth, a voice came
from the sky, saying, ``O King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is spoken: `The
kingdom has departed from you. \bibleverse{32} You shall be driven from
men, and your dwelling shall be with the animals of the field. You shall
be made to eat grass like oxen. Seven times shall pass over you, until
you know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomever he will.'\,''

i1 \bibleverse{33} This was fulfilled the same hour on Nebuchadnezzar.
He was driven from men and ate grass like oxen; and his body was wet
with the dew of the sky until his hair had grown like eagles' feathers,
and his nails like birds' claws.

i1 \bibleverse{34} At the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up
my eyes to heaven, and my understanding returned to me; and I blessed
the Most High, and I praised and honored him who lives forever, for his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom from generation to
generation. \bibleverse{35} All the inhabitants of the earth are reputed
as nothing; and he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and
among the inhabitants of the earth; and no one can stop his hand, or ask
him, ``What are you doing?''

i1 \bibleverse{36} At the same time my understanding returned to me; and
for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and brightness returned to me.
My counselors and my lords sought me; and I was established in my
kingdom, and excellent greatness was added to me. \bibleverse{37} Now I,
Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven; for all
his works are truth, and his ways justice; and those who walk in pride
he is able to abase.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{belsasar-consagra-los-vasos-del-templo-de-los-juduxedos}{%
\subsection{Belsasar consagra los vasos del templo de los
judíos}\label{belsasar-consagra-los-vasos-del-templo-de-los-juduxedos}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} El rey Belsasar hizo un gran banquete a mil de sus
señores, y bebió vino ante los mil. \footnote{\textbf{5:1} Dan 7,1}
\bibleverse{2} Belsasar, mientras probaba el vino, mandó que le trajeran
los vasos de oro y de plata que Nabucodonosor, su padre, había sacado
del templo que estaba en Jerusalén, para que el rey y sus señores, sus
mujeres y sus concubinas bebieran de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{5:2} Dan
  1,2; 2Cró 36,10} \bibleverse{3} Entonces trajeron los vasos de oro que
habían sido sacados del templo de la casa de Dios que estaba en
Jerusalén, y el rey y sus señores, sus esposas y sus concubinas,
bebieron de ellos. \bibleverse{4} Bebieron vino y alabaron a los dioses
de oro, de plata, de bronce, de hierro, de madera y de piedra.

\hypertarget{aparece-la-enigmuxe1tica-inscripciuxf3n-que-ninguxfan-sabio-puede-interpretar-por-consejo-de-la-reina-madre-traen-a-daniel}{%
\subsection{Aparece la enigmática inscripción, que ningún sabio puede
interpretar; por consejo de la reina madre, traen a
Daniel}\label{aparece-la-enigmuxe1tica-inscripciuxf3n-que-ninguxfan-sabio-puede-interpretar-por-consejo-de-la-reina-madre-traen-a-daniel}}

\bibleverse{5} En esa misma hora, los dedos de la mano de un hombre
salieron y escribieron cerca del candelabro en el yeso de la pared del
palacio del rey. El rey vio la parte de la mano que escribía.
\bibleverse{6} Entonces el rostro del rey se transformó en él, y sus
pensamientos lo turbaron; y las articulaciones de sus muslos se
aflojaron, y sus rodillas se golpearon una contra otra.

\bibleverse{7} El rey pidió a gritos que trajeran a los encantadores, a
los caldeos y a los adivinos. El rey habló y dijo a los sabios de
Babilonia: ``El que lea esta escritura y me muestre su interpretación
será vestido de púrpura y tendrá una cadena de oro al cuello, y será el
tercer gobernante del reino.'' \footnote{\textbf{5:7} Dan 2,2; Dan 4,6}

\bibleverse{8} Entonces entraron todos los sabios del rey, pero no
supieron leer la escritura ni pudieron dar a conocer al rey la
interpretación. \bibleverse{9} Entonces el rey Belsasar se turbó en gran
manera, y su rostro se transformó en él, y sus señores quedaron
perplejos.

\bibleverse{10} La reina, a causa de las palabras del rey y de sus
señores, entró en la casa del banquete. La reina habló y dijo: ``Oh rey,
vive para siempre; no permitas que tus pensamientos te perturben, ni que
tu rostro se altere. \bibleverse{11} Hay un hombre en tu reino en el que
está el espíritu de los dioses santos; y en los días de tu padre se
hallaron en él luz, entendimiento y sabiduría, como la sabiduría de los
dioses. El rey Nabucodonosor, tu padre --- sí, el rey, tu padre --- lo
hizo maestro de los magos, encantadores, caldeos y adivinos, \footnote{\textbf{5:11}
  Dan 4,8} \bibleverse{12} porque se halló un espíritu excelente,
conocimiento, entendimiento, interpretación de sueños, demostración de
sentencias oscuras y disolución de dudas en el mismo Daniel, a quien el
rey llamó Beltsasar. Que se llame a Daniel, y él mostrará la
interpretación''. \footnote{\textbf{5:12} Ezeq 28,3}

\hypertarget{las-brillantes-promesas-del-rey-a-daniel-su-interpretaciuxf3n-del-guiuxf3n-fantasma-su-discurso-de-castigo-y-el-anuncio-de-la-desgracia}{%
\subsection{Las brillantes promesas del rey a Daniel; su interpretación
del guión fantasma, su discurso de castigo y el anuncio de la
desgracia}\label{las-brillantes-promesas-del-rey-a-daniel-su-interpretaciuxf3n-del-guiuxf3n-fantasma-su-discurso-de-castigo-y-el-anuncio-de-la-desgracia}}

\bibleverse{13} Entonces Daniel fue llevado ante el rey. El rey habló y
dijo a Daniel: ``¿Eres tú ese Daniel de los hijos de la cautividad de
Judá, que el rey mi padre sacó de Judá? \bibleverse{14} He oído decir de
ti que el espíritu de los dioses está en ti y que se encuentran en ti
luz, entendimiento y excelente sabiduría. \bibleverse{15} Ahora bien,
los sabios, los encantadores, han sido traídos ante mí para que lean
esta escritura y me den a conocer su interpretación; pero no han podido
mostrar la interpretación del asunto. \bibleverse{16} Pero he oído
hablar de ti, que puedes dar interpretaciones y disipar dudas. Ahora
bien, si puedes leer la escritura y darme a conocer su interpretación,
serás vestido de púrpura y tendrás un collar de oro alrededor de tu
cuello, y serás el tercer gobernante del reino.''

\bibleverse{17} Entonces Daniel respondió ante el rey: ``Deja que tus
regalos sean para ti, y da tus recompensas a otro. Sin embargo, yo leeré
la escritura al rey, y le daré a conocer la interpretación.

\bibleverse{18} ``A ti, rey, el Dios Altísimo te dio a Nabucodonosor, tu
padre, el reino, la grandeza, la gloria y la majestad. \footnote{\textbf{5:18}
  Dan 2,37; Dan 4,25} \bibleverse{19} A causa de la grandeza que le dio,
todos los pueblos, naciones y lenguas temieron y temblaron ante él. Mató
a quien quiso, y mantuvo con vida a quien quiso. Levantó a quien quiso,
y abatió a quien quiso. \bibleverse{20} Pero cuando su corazón se
enalteció y su espíritu se endureció para actuar con soberbia, fue
depuesto de su trono real y le quitaron su gloria. \footnote{\textbf{5:20}
  Hech 12,23} \bibleverse{21} Fue expulsado de los hijos de los hombres,
y su corazón se hizo como el de los animales, y su morada fue con los
asnos salvajes. Fue alimentado con hierba como los bueyes, y su cuerpo
fue mojado con el rocío del cielo, hasta que supo que el Dios Altísimo
gobierna en el reino de los hombres, y que pone sobre él a quien quiere.

\bibleverse{22} ``Tú, hijo suyo, Belsasar, no has humillado tu corazón,
aunque sabías todo esto, \bibleverse{23} sino que te has levantado
contra el Señor del cielo; y han traído ante ti los vasos de su casa, y
tú y tus señores, tus esposas y tus concubinas habéis bebido vino de
ellos. Has alabado a los dioses de la plata y del oro, del bronce, del
hierro, de la madera y de la piedra, que no ven, ni oyen, ni saben; y no
has glorificado al Dios en cuya mano está tu aliento, y cuyos son todos
tus caminos. \footnote{\textbf{5:23} Dan 5,2; Sal 115,4-7}
\bibleverse{24} Entonces la parte de la mano fue enviada de delante de
él, y se inscribió esta escritura.

\bibleverse{25} ``Esta es la escritura que estaba inscrita: `MENE, MENE,
TEKEL, UPHARSIN'.

\bibleverse{26} ``Esta es la interpretación de la cosa: MENE: Dios ha
contado tu reino, y lo ha llevado a su fin. \bibleverse{27} TEKEL: se os
pesa en la balanza y se os encuentra faltos. \bibleverse{28} PERES: tu
reino está dividido y entregado a los medos y a los persas''.

\hypertarget{el-honor-de-daniel-final-violento-de-belsasar-y-su-imperio}{%
\subsection{El honor de Daniel; final violento de Belsasar y su
imperio}\label{el-honor-de-daniel-final-violento-de-belsasar-y-su-imperio}}

\bibleverse{29} Entonces Belsasar ordenó que vistieran a Daniel de
púrpura y le pusieran un collar de oro al cuello, e hicieron proclamar
sobre él que sería el tercer gobernante del reino. \footnote{\textbf{5:29}
  Dan 2,48; Gén 41,42-43}

\bibleverse{30} Aquella noche fue asesinado Belsasar, el rey caldeo.
\bibleverse{31} Darío el Medo recibió el reino, siendo de unos sesenta y
dos años de edad. \footnote{\textbf{5:31} Dan 9,1; Is 13,17}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of
his lords, and drank wine before the thousand. \bibleverse{2}
Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine, commanded that the golden and
silver vessels which Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken out of the
temple which was in Jerusalem be brought to him, that the king and his
lords, his wives and his concubines, might drink from them.
\bibleverse{3} Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out
of the temple of God's house which was at Jerusalem; and the king and
his lords, his wives and his concubines, drank from them. \bibleverse{4}
They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of bronze,
of iron, of wood, and of stone.

\bibleverse{5} In the same hour, the fingers of a man's hand came out
and wrote near the lamp stand on the plaster of the wall of the king's
palace. The king saw the part of the hand that wrote. \bibleverse{6}
Then the king's face was changed in him, and his thoughts troubled him;
and the joints of his thighs were loosened, and his knees struck one
against another.

\bibleverse{7} The king cried aloud to bring in the enchanters, the
Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. The king spoke and said to the wise men
of Babylon, ``Whoever reads this writing and shows me its interpretation
shall be clothed with purple, and have a chain of gold about his neck,
and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.''

\bibleverse{8} Then all the king's wise men came in; but they could not
read the writing, and couldn't make known to the king the
interpretation. \bibleverse{9} Then King Belshazzar was greatly
troubled, and his face was changed in him, and his lords were perplexed.

\bibleverse{10} The queen by reason of the words of the king and his
lords came into the banquet house. The queen spoke and said, ``O king,
live forever; don't let your thoughts trouble you, nor let your face be
changed. \bibleverse{11} There is a man in your kingdom in whom is the
spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of your father, light and
understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, were found in
him. The king, Nebuchadnezzar, your father---yes, the king, your
father---made him master of the magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans, and
soothsayers, \bibleverse{12} because an excellent spirit, knowledge,
understanding, interpreting of dreams, showing of dark sentences, and
dissolving of doubts were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named
Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will show the
interpretation.''

\bibleverse{13} Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king
spoke and said to Daniel, ``Are you that Daniel of the children of the
captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Judah?
\bibleverse{14} I have heard of you, that the spirit of the gods is in
you and that light, understanding, and excellent wisdom are found in
you. \bibleverse{15} Now the wise men, the enchanters, have been brought
in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known to me
its interpretation; but they could not show the interpretation of the
thing. \bibleverse{16} But I have heard of you, that you can give
interpretations and dissolve doubts. Now if you can read the writing and
make known to me its interpretation, you shall be clothed with purple,
and have a chain of gold around your neck, and shall be the third ruler
in the kingdom.''

\bibleverse{17} Then Daniel answered before the king, ``Let your gifts
be to yourself, and give your rewards to another. Nevertheless, I will
read the writing to the king, and make known to him the interpretation.

\bibleverse{18} ``To you, king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar
your father the kingdom, and greatness, and glory, and majesty.
\bibleverse{19} Because of the greatness that he gave him, all the
peoples, nations, and languages trembled and feared before him. He
killed whom he wanted to, and he kept alive whom he wanted to. He raised
up whom he wanted to, and he put down whom he wanted to. \bibleverse{20}
But when his heart was lifted up, and his spirit was hardened so that he
dealt proudly, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his
glory from him. \bibleverse{21} He was driven from the sons of men, and
his heart was made like the animals', and his dwelling was with the wild
donkeys. He was fed with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the
dew of the sky, until he knew that the Most High God rules in the
kingdom of men, and that he sets up over it whomever he will.

\bibleverse{22} ``You, his son, Belshazzar, have not humbled your heart,
though you knew all this, \bibleverse{23} but have lifted up yourself
against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his
house before you, and you and your lords, your wives, and your
concubines, have drunk wine from them. You have praised the gods of
silver and gold, of bronze, iron, wood, and stone, which don't see, or
hear, or know; and you have not glorified the God in whose hand your
breath is, and whose are all your ways. \bibleverse{24} Then the part of
the hand was sent from before him, and this writing was inscribed.

\bibleverse{25} ``This is the writing that was inscribed: `MENE, MENE,
TEKEL, UPHARSIN.'

\bibleverse{26} ``This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE: God has
counted your kingdom, and brought it to an end. \bibleverse{27} TEKEL:
you are weighed in the balances, and are found wanting. \bibleverse{28}
PERES: your kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.''

\bibleverse{29} Then Belshazzar commanded, and they clothed Daniel with
purple, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made proclamation
concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

\bibleverse{30} In that night Belshazzar the Chaldean King was slain.
\bibleverse{31} Darius the Mede received the kingdom, being about
sixty-two years old.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-levantamiento-de-daniel-durante-la-reorganizaciuxf3n-de-la-administraciuxf3n-del-reich-por-daruxedo-envidia-de-sus-compauxf1eros-funcionarios}{%
\subsection{El levantamiento de Daniel durante la reorganización de la
administración del Reich por Darío; Envidia de sus compañeros
funcionarios}\label{el-levantamiento-de-daniel-durante-la-reorganizaciuxf3n-de-la-administraciuxf3n-del-reich-por-daruxedo-envidia-de-sus-compauxf1eros-funcionarios}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Quiso Darío poner sobre el reino a ciento veinte
gobernadores locales, que debían estar en todo el reino; \bibleverse{2}
y sobre ellos a tres presidentes, de los cuales Daniel era uno, para que
estos gobernadores locales les dieran cuenta, y el rey no sufriera
ninguna pérdida. \bibleverse{3} Entonces este Daniel se distinguió por
encima de los presidentes y de los gobernadores locales, porque había en
él un espíritu excelente; y el rey pensó en ponerlo sobre todo el reino.
\footnote{\textbf{6:3} Dan 5,12}

\bibleverse{4} Entonces los presidentes y los gobernadores locales
trataron de encontrar ocasión contra Daniel en lo que respecta al reino;
pero no pudieron encontrar ocasión ni falta, porque era fiel. No se
encontró en él ningún error o falta. \bibleverse{5} Entonces estos
hombres dijeron: ``No encontraremos ninguna ocasión contra este Daniel,
a menos que la encontremos contra él en cuanto a la ley de su Dios.''

\bibleverse{6} Entonces estos presidentes y gobernadores locales se
reunieron ante el rey y le dijeron lo siguiente: ``¡Rey Darío, vive para
siempre! \footnote{\textbf{6:6} Dan 3,9; Dan 5,10}

\hypertarget{los-funcionarios-celosos-obtienen-un-decreto-real-sobre-un-ejercicio-de-oraciuxf3n-uxfanico-en-el-reino}{%
\subsection{Los funcionarios celosos obtienen un decreto real sobre un
ejercicio de oración único en el
reino}\label{los-funcionarios-celosos-obtienen-un-decreto-real-sobre-un-ejercicio-de-oraciuxf3n-uxfanico-en-el-reino}}

\bibleverse{7} Todos los presidentes del reino, los diputados y los
gobernadores locales, los consejeros y los gobernadores, han consultado
juntos para establecer un estatuto real y para hacer un decreto fuerte,
que cualquiera que pida una petición a cualquier dios u hombre durante
treinta días, excepto a ti, oh rey, será arrojado al foso de los leones.
\bibleverse{8} Ahora, oh rey, establece el decreto y firma el escrito,
para que no sea cambiado, según la ley de los medos y los persas, que no
se altera.'' \footnote{\textbf{6:8} Dan 6,15; Est 1,19; Est 8,8}
\bibleverse{9} Por lo tanto, el rey Darío firmó el escrito y el decreto.

\bibleverse{10} Cuando Daniel supo que la escritura estaba firmada,
entró en su casa (ahora sus ventanas estaban abiertas en su habitación
hacia Jerusalén) y se arrodilló tres veces al día, y oró, y dio gracias
ante su Dios, como lo hacía antes. \footnote{\textbf{6:10} 1Re 8,48; Jer
  51,50; Sal 55,17}

\hypertarget{la-transgresiuxf3n-del-edicto-de-daniel-como-resultado-de-su-temor-de-dios-su-condena-a-pesar-del-dolor-del-rey}{%
\subsection{La transgresión del edicto de Daniel como resultado de su
temor de Dios; su condena a pesar del dolor del
rey}\label{la-transgresiuxf3n-del-edicto-de-daniel-como-resultado-de-su-temor-de-dios-su-condena-a-pesar-del-dolor-del-rey}}

\bibleverse{11} Entonces se reunieron aquellos hombres, y encontraron a
Daniel haciendo peticiones y súplicas ante su Dios. \bibleverse{12}
Entonces se acercaron y hablaron ante el rey sobre el decreto del rey:
``¿No has firmado un decreto para que todo hombre que haga una petición
a cualquier dios u hombre dentro de treinta días, excepto a ti, oh rey,
sea arrojado al foso de los leones?'' El rey respondió: ``Esto es
cierto, según la ley de los medos y los persas, que no se altera''.
\footnote{\textbf{6:12} Dan 3,10}

\bibleverse{13} Entonces respondieron y dijeron ante el rey: ``Ese
Daniel, que es de los hijos del cautiverio de Judá, no te respeta, oh
rey, ni el decreto que has firmado, sino que hace su petición tres veces
al día.'' \bibleverse{14} Entonces el rey, al oír estas palabras, se
disgustó mucho y se empeñó en liberar a Daniel, y trabajó hasta la
puesta del sol para rescatarlo.

\bibleverse{15} Entonces estos hombres se reunieron ante el rey y le
dijeron: ``Sepa, oh rey, que es una ley de los medos y los persas que
ningún decreto ni estatuto que el rey establezca puede ser cambiado.''

\bibleverse{16} Entonces el rey ordenó, y llevaron a Daniel y lo echaron
al foso de los leones. El rey habló y dijo a Daniel: ``Tu Dios, al que
sirves continuamente, te librará''. \footnote{\textbf{6:16} Dan 6,20}

\bibleverse{17} Se trajo una piedra y se puso en la boca del foso, y el
rey la selló con su propio sello y con el de sus señores, para que no se
cambiara nada respecto a Daniel. \bibleverse{18} Entonces el rey se fue
a su palacio y pasó la noche en ayuno. No le trajeron ningún instrumento
musical, y su sueño huyó de él.

\hypertarget{el-rescate-de-daniel-la-alegruxeda-y-la-gracia-del-rey-castigo-de-los-envidiosos-culpables}{%
\subsection{El rescate de Daniel; la alegría y la gracia del rey;
Castigo de los envidiosos
culpables}\label{el-rescate-de-daniel-la-alegruxeda-y-la-gracia-del-rey-castigo-de-los-envidiosos-culpables}}

\bibleverse{19} Entonces el rey se levantó muy temprano por la mañana y
se dirigió a toda prisa al foso de los leones. \bibleverse{20} Cuando se
acercó al foso a Daniel, éste gritó con voz turbada. El rey habló y dijo
a Daniel: ``Daniel, siervo del Dios vivo, ¿es tu Dios, al que sirves
continuamente, capaz de librarte de los leones?'' \footnote{\textbf{6:20}
  Dan 3,17}

\bibleverse{21} Entonces Daniel dijo al rey: ``¡Oh rey, vive para
siempre! \footnote{\textbf{6:21} Dan 6,6} \bibleverse{22} Mi Dios ha
enviado a su ángel y ha cerrado la boca de los leones, y no me han hecho
daño, porque se ha encontrado inocencia en mí ante él; y también ante
ti, oh rey, no he hecho ningún daño.'' \footnote{\textbf{6:22} Dan 3,28;
  Heb 11,33}

\bibleverse{23} El rey se alegró mucho y ordenó que sacaran a Daniel del
foso. Y Daniel fue sacado del foso, y no se le encontró ningún daño,
porque había confiado en su Dios. \footnote{\textbf{6:23} Sal 37,40}

\bibleverse{24} El rey lo ordenó, y trajeron a aquellos hombres que
habían acusado a Daniel, y los arrojaron al foso de los leones: a ellos,
a sus hijos y a sus mujeres; y los leones los destrozaron, y rompieron
todos sus huesos antes de que llegaran al fondo del foso.

\hypertarget{reconocimiento-de-la-grandeza-del-dios-de-los-juduxedos-por-un-nuevo-edicto-real-daniel-permanece-en-una-posiciuxf3n-alta}{%
\subsection{Reconocimiento de la grandeza del Dios de los judíos por un
nuevo edicto real; Daniel permanece en una posición
alta}\label{reconocimiento-de-la-grandeza-del-dios-de-los-juduxedos-por-un-nuevo-edicto-real-daniel-permanece-en-una-posiciuxf3n-alta}}

\bibleverse{25} Entonces el rey Darío escribió a todos los pueblos,
naciones y lenguas que habitan en toda la tierra: ``Que la paz se
multiplique con vosotros. \bibleverse{26} ``Hago un decreto para que en
todo el dominio de mi reino los hombres tiemblen y teman ante el Dios de
Daniel. ``Porque él es el Dios vivo, y firme para siempre. Su reino es
el que no será destruido. Su dominio será hasta el final. \footnote{\textbf{6:26}
  Dan 4,3} \bibleverse{27} Él libera y rescata. Él hace señales y
maravillas en el cielo y en la tierra, que ha librado a Daniel del poder
de los leones''.

\bibleverse{28} Así que este Daniel prosperó en el reinado de Darío y en
el de Ciro el Persa. \footnote{\textbf{6:28} Dan 1,21}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom one hundred
twenty local governors, who should be throughout the whole kingdom;
\bibleverse{2} and over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was one,
that these local governors might give account to them, and that the king
should suffer no loss. \bibleverse{3} Then this Daniel was distinguished
above the presidents and the local governors, because an excellent
spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.

\bibleverse{4} Then the presidents and the local governors sought to
find occasion against Daniel as touching the kingdom; but they could
find no occasion or fault, because he was faithful. There wasn't any
error or fault found in him. \bibleverse{5} Then these men said, ``We
won't find any occasion against this Daniel, unless we find it against
him concerning the law of his God.''

\bibleverse{6} Then these presidents and local governors assembled
together to the king, and said this to him, ``King Darius, live forever!
\bibleverse{7} All the presidents of the kingdom, the deputies and the
local governors, the counselors and the governors, have consulted
together to establish a royal statute and to make a strong decree, that
whoever asks a petition of any god or man for thirty days, except of
you, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions. \bibleverse{8} Now,
O king, establish the decree and sign the writing, that it not be
changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which doesn't
alter.'' \bibleverse{9} Therefore King Darius signed the writing and the
decree.

\bibleverse{10} When Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went
into his house (now his windows were open in his room toward Jerusalem)
and he kneeled on his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave
thanks before his God, as he did before. \bibleverse{11} Then these men
assembled together, and found Daniel making petition and supplication
before his God. \bibleverse{12} Then they came near, and spoke before
the king concerning the king's decree: ``Haven't you signed a decree
that every man who makes a petition to any god or man within thirty
days, except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions?''

The king answered, ``This thing is true, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which doesn't alter.''

\bibleverse{13} Then they answered and said before the king, ``That
Daniel, who is of the children of the captivity of Judah, doesn't
respect you, O king, nor the decree that you have signed, but makes his
petition three times a day.'' \bibleverse{14} Then the king, when he
heard these words, was very displeased, and set his heart on Daniel to
deliver him; and he labored until the going down of the sun to rescue
him.

\bibleverse{15} Then these men assembled together to the king, and said
to the king, ``Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians,
that no decree nor statute which the king establishes may be changed.''

\bibleverse{16} Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast him into the den of lions. The king spoke and said to Daniel,
``Your God whom you serve continually, he will deliver you.''

\bibleverse{17} A stone was brought, and laid on the mouth of the den;
and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his
lords; that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel. \bibleverse{18}
Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting. No
musical instruments were brought before him; and his sleep fled from
him.

\bibleverse{19} Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went
in haste to the den of lions. \bibleverse{20} When he came near to the
den to Daniel, he cried with a troubled voice. The king spoke and said
to Daniel, ``Daniel, servant of the living God, is your God, whom you
serve continually, able to deliver you from the lions?''

\bibleverse{21} Then Daniel said to the king, ``O king, live forever!
\bibleverse{22} My God has sent his angel, and has shut the lions'
mouths, and they have not hurt me, because innocence was found in me
before him; and also before you, O king, I have done no harm.''

\bibleverse{23} Then the king was exceedingly glad, and commanded that
they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of
the den, and no kind of harm was found on him, because he had trusted in
his God.

\bibleverse{24} The king commanded, and they brought those men who had
accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions---them, their
children, and their wives; and the lions mauled them, and broke all
their bones in pieces before they came to the bottom of the den.

\bibleverse{25} Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations, and
languages who dwell in all the earth:

i1 ``Peace be multiplied to you.

i1 \bibleverse{26} ``I make a decree that in all the dominion of my
kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel. ``For he is the
living God, and steadfast forever. His kingdom is that which will not be
destroyed. His dominion will be even to the end. \bibleverse{27} He
delivers and rescues. He works signs and wonders in heaven and in earth,
who has delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.''

\bibleverse{28} So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius and in
the reign of Cyrus the Persian.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{daniels-traum-von-dem-erscheinen-eines-luxf6wen-eines-buxe4ren-eines-panthers-eines-furchtbaren-tieres-mit-zehn-huxf6rnern-sowie-eines-kleinen-horns}{%
\subsection{Daniels Traum von dem Erscheinen eines Löwen, eines Bären,
eines Panthers, eines furchtbaren Tieres mit zehn Hörnern sowie eines
kleinen
Horns}\label{daniels-traum-von-dem-erscheinen-eines-luxf6wen-eines-buxe4ren-eines-panthers-eines-furchtbaren-tieres-mit-zehn-huxf6rnern-sowie-eines-kleinen-horns}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} En el primer año de Belsasar, rey de Babilonia, Daniel
tuvo un sueño y visiones de su cabeza mientras estaba en su cama. Luego
escribió el sueño y contó la suma de los asuntos. \footnote{\textbf{7:1}
  Dan 5,1}

\bibleverse{2} Daniel habló y dijo: ``Vi en mi visión de noche, y he
aquí que los cuatro vientos del cielo estallaban sobre el gran mar.
\footnote{\textbf{7:2} Apoc 17,15} \bibleverse{3} Cuatro grandes
animales subían del mar, diferentes unos de otros. \footnote{\textbf{7:3}
  Apoc 13,1-2}

\bibleverse{4} ``El primero era como un león y tenía alas de águila. Yo
observé hasta que le fueron arrancadas las alas, y fue levantado de la
tierra y puesto en pie sobre dos pies como un hombre. Se le dio un
corazón de hombre. \footnote{\textbf{7:4} Dan 4,34}

\bibleverse{5} ``He aquí que había otro animal, un segundo, como un oso.
Estaba levantado por un lado, y tenía tres costillas en la boca entre
los dientes. Le dijeron lo siguiente `¡Levántate! Devora mucha carne''.

\bibleverse{6} ``Después de esto vi, y he aquí otro, semejante a un
leopardo, que tenía sobre su espalda cuatro alas de ave. Este animal
también tenía cuatro cabezas; y se le dio dominio.

\bibleverse{7} ``Después de esto, vi en las visiones nocturnas, y he
aquí que había un cuarto animal, imponente, poderoso y sumamente fuerte.
Tenía grandes dientes de hierro. Devoraba y despedazaba, y pisoteaba los
restos con sus patas. Era diferente de todos los animales anteriores.
Tenía diez cuernos.

\bibleverse{8} ``Consideré los cuernos, y he aquí que entre ellos subía
otro cuerno, pequeño, ante el cual fueron arrancados de raíz tres de los
primeros cuernos; y he aquí que en este cuerno había ojos como ojos de
hombre, y una boca que hablaba con arrogancia. \footnote{\textbf{7:8}
  Dan 11,36}

\hypertarget{sesiuxf3n-de-la-corte-en-el-cielo-presidida-por-un-anciano-en-la-gloria-de-la-luz-decisiuxf3n-de-destruir-la-cuarta-bestia-y-derrocar-a-las-tres-primeras-bestias-transferencia-del-dominio-eterno-al-hijo-del-hombre}{%
\subsection{Sesión de la corte en el cielo presidida por un anciano en
la gloria de la luz; Decisión de destruir la cuarta bestia y derrocar a
las tres primeras bestias; Transferencia del dominio eterno al Hijo del
Hombre}\label{sesiuxf3n-de-la-corte-en-el-cielo-presidida-por-un-anciano-en-la-gloria-de-la-luz-decisiuxf3n-de-destruir-la-cuarta-bestia-y-derrocar-a-las-tres-primeras-bestias-transferencia-del-dominio-eterno-al-hijo-del-hombre}}

\bibleverse{9} ``Observé hasta que se colocaron los tronos, y se sentó
uno que era antiguo de días. Su ropa era blanca como la nieve, y el pelo
de su cabeza como lana pura. Su trono era de llamas ardientes, y sus
ruedas arden. \footnote{\textbf{7:9} Sal 90,2} \bibleverse{10} Un chorro
de fuego salió de delante de él. Miles de miles de personas lo
atendieron. Diez mil veces diez mil estaban ante él. La sentencia fue
fijada. Los libros fueron abiertos. \footnote{\textbf{7:10} Sal 68,17;
  Apoc 5,11}

\bibleverse{11} ``Velé en aquel tiempo por la voz de las palabras
arrogantes que el cuerno pronunció. Velé hasta que el animal fue
sacrificado, y su cuerpo destruido, y fue entregado para ser quemado con
fuego. \footnote{\textbf{7:11} Apoc 19,20} \bibleverse{12} En cuanto al
resto de los animales, se les quitó el dominio; pero su vida se prolongó
por una temporada y un tiempo. \footnote{\textbf{7:12} Dan 2,21}

\bibleverse{13} ``Vi en las visiones nocturnas, y he aquí que venía con
las nubes del cielo uno como un hijo de hombre, y llegó hasta el Anciano
de Días, y lo acercaron ante él. \footnote{\textbf{7:13} Luc 21,27}
\bibleverse{14} Se le dio dominio, gloria y reino, para que todos los
pueblos, naciones y lenguas le sirvieran. Su dominio es un dominio
eterno, que no pasará, y su reino uno que no será destruido.

\hypertarget{a-peticiuxf3n-suya-daniel-recibe-informaciuxf3n-de-alguien-que-estuxe1-alluxed-sobre-los-cuatro-imperios-mundiales-especialmente-sobre-la-destrucciuxf3n-del-cuarto-reino-y-el-establecimiento-del-reino-mesiuxe1nico}{%
\subsection{A petición suya, Daniel recibe información de alguien que
está allí sobre los cuatro imperios mundiales, especialmente sobre la
destrucción del cuarto reino y el establecimiento del reino
mesiánico}\label{a-peticiuxf3n-suya-daniel-recibe-informaciuxf3n-de-alguien-que-estuxe1-alluxed-sobre-los-cuatro-imperios-mundiales-especialmente-sobre-la-destrucciuxf3n-del-cuarto-reino-y-el-establecimiento-del-reino-mesiuxe1nico}}

\bibleverse{15} ``En cuanto a mí, Daniel, mi espíritu estaba afligido
dentro de mi cuerpo, y las visiones de mi cabeza me turbaban.
\bibleverse{16} Me acerqué a uno de los que estaban allí y le pregunté
la verdad sobre todo esto. ``Así me lo dijo, y me hizo saber la
interpretación de las cosas. \footnote{\textbf{7:16} Dan 7,10}
\bibleverse{17} `Estos grandes animales, que son cuatro, son cuatro
reyes que se levantarán de la tierra. \bibleverse{18} Pero los santos
del Altísimo recibirán el reino y poseerán el reino para siempre, por
los siglos de los siglos.' \footnote{\textbf{7:18} Dan 7,22}

\bibleverse{19} ``Entonces quise saber la verdad acerca del cuarto
animal, que era diferente de todos ellos, sumamente terrible, cuyos
dientes eran de hierro, y sus uñas de bronce; que devoraba, desmenuzaba
y pisoteaba las sobras con sus pies; \footnote{\textbf{7:19} Dan 7,7}
\bibleverse{20} y acerca de los diez cuernos que tenía en la cabeza y
del otro cuerno que subía, y ante el cual cayeron tres, aquel cuerno que
tenía ojos y boca que hablaba con arrogancia, cuya mirada era más
robusta que la de sus compañeros. \bibleverse{21} Vi, y el mismo cuerno
hizo la guerra contra los santos, y prevaleció contra ellos, \footnote{\textbf{7:21}
  Apoc 13,7} \bibleverse{22} hasta que llegó la antigüedad de los días,
y se dio el juicio a los santos del Altísimo, y llegó el tiempo en que
los santos poseyeron el reino.

\bibleverse{23} ``Y dijo: `El cuarto animal será un cuarto reino en la
tierra, que será diferente de todos los reinos, y devorará toda la
tierra, y la pisoteará y la hará pedazos. \bibleverse{24} En cuanto a
los diez cuernos, diez reyes se levantarán de este reino. Después de
ellos se levantará otro, que será diferente de los anteriores, y
derribará a tres reyes. \footnote{\textbf{7:24} Apoc 17,12}
\bibleverse{25} Él hablará palabras contra el Altísimo, y desgastará a
los santos del Altísimo. Él planeará cambiar los tiempos y la ley; y
serán entregados en su mano hasta un tiempo y tiempos y medio tiempo.
\footnote{\textbf{7:25} Apoc 13,5-6; Dan 12,7; Dan 4,16}

\bibleverse{26} ``\,`Pero el juicio será fijado, y le quitarán su
dominio, para consumirlo y destruirlo hasta el fin. \bibleverse{27} El
reino y el dominio, y la grandeza de los reinos bajo todo el cielo,
serán dados al pueblo de los santos del Altísimo. Su reino es un reino
eterno, y todos los dominios le servirán y le obedecerán''.

\hypertarget{impresiuxf3n-de-lo-que-se-vio-en-daniel}{%
\subsection{Impresión de lo que se vio en
Daniel}\label{impresiuxf3n-de-lo-que-se-vio-en-daniel}}

\bibleverse{28} ``Aquíestá el final del asunto. En cuanto a mí, Daniel,
mis pensamientos me turbaron mucho, y mi rostro se transformó en mí;
pero guardé el asunto en mi corazón.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, Daniel
had a dream and visions of his head while on his bed. Then he wrote the
dream and told the sum of the matters.

\bibleverse{2} Daniel spoke and said, ``I saw in my vision by night,
and, behold, the four winds of the sky broke out on the great sea.
\bibleverse{3} Four great animals came up from the sea, different from
one another.

\bibleverse{4} ``The first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings. I
watched until its wings were plucked, and it was lifted up from the
earth and made to stand on two feet as a man. A man's heart was given to
it.

\bibleverse{5} ``Behold, there was another animal, a second, like a
bear. It was raised up on one side, and three ribs were in its mouth
between its teeth. They said this to it: `Arise! Devour much flesh!'

\bibleverse{6} ``After this I saw, and behold, another, like a leopard,
which had on its back four wings of a bird. The animal also had four
heads; and dominion was given to it.

\bibleverse{7} ``After this I saw in the night visions, and, behold,
there was a fourth animal, awesome, powerful, and exceedingly strong. It
had great iron teeth. It devoured and broke in pieces, and stamped the
residue with its feet. It was different from all the animals that were
before it. It had ten horns.

\bibleverse{8} ``I considered the horns, and behold, there came up among
them another horn, a little one, before which three of the first horns
were plucked up by the roots; and behold, in this horn were eyes like
the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking arrogantly. \bibleverse{9} ``I
watched until thrones were placed, and one who was ancient of days sat.
His clothing was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool.
His throne was fiery flames, and its wheels burning fire.
\bibleverse{10} A fiery stream issued and came out from before him.
Thousands of thousands ministered to him. Ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him. The judgment was set. The books were opened.

\bibleverse{11} ``I watched at that time because of the voice of the
arrogant words which the horn spoke. I watched even until the animal was
slain, and its body destroyed, and it was given to be burned with fire.
\bibleverse{12} As for the rest of the animals, their dominion was taken
away; yet their lives were prolonged for a season and a time.

\bibleverse{13} ``I saw in the night visions, and behold, there came
with the clouds of the sky one like a son of man, and he came even to
the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him.
\bibleverse{14} Dominion was given him, and glory, and a kingdom, that
all the peoples, nations, and languages should serve him. His dominion
is an everlasting dominion, which will not pass away, and his kingdom
one that will not be destroyed.

\bibleverse{15} ``As for me, Daniel, my spirit was grieved within my
body, and the visions of my head troubled me. \bibleverse{16} I came
near to one of those who stood by, and asked him the truth concerning
all this.

``So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.
\bibleverse{17} `These great animals, which are four, are four kings,
who will arise out of the earth. \bibleverse{18} But the saints of the
Most High will receive the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever,
even forever and ever.'

\bibleverse{19} ``Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth
animal, which was different from all of them, exceedingly terrible,
whose teeth were of iron, and its nails of bronze; which devoured, broke
in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet; \bibleverse{20} and
concerning the ten horns that were on its head and the other horn which
came up, and before which three fell, even that horn that had eyes and a
mouth that spoke arrogantly, whose look was more stout than its fellows.
\bibleverse{21} I saw, and the same horn made war with the saints, and
prevailed against them, \bibleverse{22} until the ancient of days came,
and judgment was given to the saints of the Most High, and the time came
that the saints possessed the kingdom.

\bibleverse{23} ``So he said, `The fourth animal will be a fourth
kingdom on earth, which will be different from all the kingdoms, and
will devour the whole earth, and will tread it down and break it in
pieces. \bibleverse{24} As for the ten horns, ten kings will arise out
of this kingdom. Another will arise after them; and he will be different
from the former, and he will put down three kings. \bibleverse{25} He
will speak words against the Most High, and will wear out the saints of
the Most High. He will plan to change the times and the law; and they
will be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time.

\bibleverse{26} ``\,`But the judgment will be set, and they will take
away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it to the end.
\bibleverse{27} The kingdom and the dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdoms under the whole sky, will be given to the people of the saints
of the Most High. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions will serve and obey him.'

\bibleverse{28} ``Here is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my
thoughts troubled me greatly, and my face was changed in me; but I kept
the matter in my heart.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{escena-de-la-cara-del-sueuxf1o-lucha-del-carnero-de-cuernos-desiguales-persa-y-el-macho-cabruxedo-de-un-cuerno-griego-victoria-y-fortalecimiento-de-este-uxfaltimo}{%
\subsection{Escena de la cara del sueño; Lucha del carnero de cuernos
desiguales (persa) y el macho cabrío de un cuerno (griego); Victoria y
fortalecimiento de este
último}\label{escena-de-la-cara-del-sueuxf1o-lucha-del-carnero-de-cuernos-desiguales-persa-y-el-macho-cabruxedo-de-un-cuerno-griego-victoria-y-fortalecimiento-de-este-uxfaltimo}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} En el tercer año del reinado del rey Belsasar, se me
apareció una visión, a mí, Daniel, después de la que se me apareció al
principio. \bibleverse{2} Vi la visión. Y cuando vi, estaba en la
ciudadela de Susa, que está en la provincia de Elam. Vi en la visión, y
estaba junto al río Ulai. \bibleverse{3} Entonces levanté mis ojos y vi,
y he aquí que un carnero que tenía dos cuernos estaba delante del río.
Los dos cuernos eran altos, pero uno era más alto que el otro, y el más
alto subía al final. \bibleverse{4} Vi que el carnero empujaba hacia el
oeste, hacia el norte y hacia el sur. Ningún animal podía hacer frente a
él. No había ninguno que pudiera librar de su mano, sino que él hacía
según su voluntad, y se engrandecía.

\bibleverse{5} Mientras pensaba, he aquí que un macho cabrío venía del
oeste sobre la superficie de toda la tierra, y no tocaba el suelo. El
macho cabrío tenía un cuerno notable entre los ojos. \bibleverse{6} Se
acercó al carnero que tenía los dos cuernos, el cual vi parado frente al
río, y corrió sobre él con la furia de su poder. \bibleverse{7} Lo vi
acercarse al carnero, y se llenó de ira contra él, e hirió al carnero y
le rompió los dos cuernos. No hubo fuerza en el carnero para resistir
ante él, sino que lo arrojó al suelo y lo pisoteó. No hubo nadie que
pudiera librar al carnero de su mano. \bibleverse{8} El macho cabrío se
engrandeció sobremanera. Cuando se hizo fuerte, el gran cuerno se
rompió, y en su lugar surgieron cuatro cuernos notables hacia los cuatro
vientos del cielo. \footnote{\textbf{8:8} Dan 7,6; Dan 11,4}

\hypertarget{buen-humor-y-ultraje-religioso-del-cuerno-pequeuxf1o-que-creciuxf3-en-uno-de-los-cuatro-cuernos-de-la-cabra}{%
\subsection{Buen humor y ultraje religioso del cuerno pequeño que creció
en uno de los cuatro cuernos de la
cabra}\label{buen-humor-y-ultraje-religioso-del-cuerno-pequeuxf1o-que-creciuxf3-en-uno-de-los-cuatro-cuernos-de-la-cabra}}

\bibleverse{9} De uno de ellos salió un cuerno pequeño que creció
enormemente hacia el sur, hacia el este y hacia la tierra gloriosa.
\footnote{\textbf{8:9} Dan 7,8; Dan 11,16} \bibleverse{10} Se
engrandeció hasta el ejército del cielo, y echó por tierra a algunos del
ejército y de las estrellas y los pisoteó. \bibleverse{11} Sí, se
engrandeció hasta el príncipe del ejército; y le quitó el holocausto
continuo, y el lugar de su santuario fue derribado. \footnote{\textbf{8:11}
  Dan 11,31} \bibleverse{12} El ejército se entregó a él junto con el
holocausto continuo por desobediencia. Echó por tierra la verdad, e hizo
su voluntad y prosperó.

\hypertarget{revelaciuxf3n-del-uxe1ngel-mensajero-que-la-deshonra-religiosa-del-cuerno-pequeuxf1o-duraruxe1-1150-duxedas}{%
\subsection{Revelación del ángel mensajero que la deshonra religiosa del
cuerno pequeño durará 1150
días}\label{revelaciuxf3n-del-uxe1ngel-mensajero-que-la-deshonra-religiosa-del-cuerno-pequeuxf1o-duraruxe1-1150-duxedas}}

\bibleverse{13} Entonces oí a un santo que hablaba; y otro santo dijo a
aquel que hablaba: ``¿Hasta cuándo será la visión sobre el holocausto
continuo y la desobediencia que desolará, para dar a hollar tanto el
santuario como el ejército?''

\bibleverse{14} Me dijo: ``Hasta dos mil trescientas tardes y mañanas.
Entonces el santuario será purificado''.

\hypertarget{gabriel-el-arcuxe1ngel-en-forma-humana-muestra-el-rostro-de-daniel-y-anuncia-los-perversos-acontecimientos-del-uxfaltimo-rey-griego}{%
\subsection{Gabriel, el arcángel en forma humana, muestra el rostro de
Daniel y anuncia los perversos acontecimientos del último rey
griego}\label{gabriel-el-arcuxe1ngel-en-forma-humana-muestra-el-rostro-de-daniel-y-anuncia-los-perversos-acontecimientos-del-uxfaltimo-rey-griego}}

\bibleverse{15} Cuando yo, Daniel, vi la visión, traté de entenderla. Y
he aquí que se presentó ante mí alguien con apariencia de hombre.
\bibleverse{16} Oí la voz de un hombre entre las orillas del Ulai, que
llamaba y decía: ``Gabriel, haz que este hombre entienda la visión''.
\footnote{\textbf{8:16} Dan 9,21}

\bibleverse{17} Entonces se acercó a donde yo estaba; y cuando llegó, me
asusté y caí de bruces; pero me dijo: ``Entiende, hijo de hombre, porque
la visión pertenece al tiempo del fin.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:17} Dan
  10,9}

\bibleverse{18} Mientras hablaba conmigo, caí en un profundo sueño con
el rostro hacia el suelo; pero él me tocó y me enderezó.

\bibleverse{19} Dijo: ``He aquí, yo te haré saber lo que habrá en el
último tiempo de la indignación, pues pertenece al tiempo señalado del
fin. \bibleverse{20} El carnero que viste, que tenía los dos cuernos,
son los reyes de Media y de Persia. \bibleverse{21} El macho cabrío
áspero es el rey de Grecia. El gran cuerno que está entre sus ojos es el
primer rey. \bibleverse{22} En cuanto a lo que fue quebrado, en el lugar
donde se levantaron cuatro, se levantarán cuatro reinos de la nación,
pero no con su poder.

\bibleverse{23} ``En el último tiempo de su reino, cuando los
transgresores hayan llegado a la plenitud, se levantará un rey de rostro
feroz y que entiende de enigmas. \footnote{\textbf{8:23} Dan 11,21;
  1Maca 1,11} \bibleverse{24} Su poder será poderoso, pero no por su
propia fuerza. Destruirá imponentemente, y prosperará en lo que haga.
Destruirá a los poderosos y al pueblo santo. \bibleverse{25} A través de
su política hará que el engaño prospere en su mano. Se engrandecerá en
su corazón, y destruirá a muchos en su seguridad. También se levantará
contra el príncipe de los príncipes, pero será quebrado sin manos
humanas.

\bibleverse{26} ``La visión de las tardes y las mañanas que se ha
contado es verdadera; pero sella la visión, porque pertenece a muchos
días por venir.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:26} Dan 12,4}

\hypertarget{la-consternaciuxf3n-y-la-enfermedad-de-daniel-de-la-cara}{%
\subsection{La consternación y la enfermedad de Daniel de la
cara}\label{la-consternaciuxf3n-y-la-enfermedad-de-daniel-de-la-cara}}

\bibleverse{27} Yo, Daniel, me desmayé y estuve enfermo durante algunos
días. Luego me levanté y me ocupé de los asuntos del rey. Me asombraba
la visión, pero nadie la entendía.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} In the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar, a
vision appeared to me, even to me, Daniel, after that which appeared to
me at the first. \bibleverse{2} I saw the vision. Now it was so, that
when I saw, I was in the citadel of Susa, which is in the province of
Elam. I saw in the vision, and I was by the river Ulai. \bibleverse{3}
Then I lifted up my eyes and saw, and behold, a ram which had two horns
stood before the river. The two horns were high, but one was higher than
the other, and the higher came up last. \bibleverse{4} I saw the ram
pushing westward, northward, and southward. No animals could stand
before him. There wasn't any who could deliver out of his hand, but he
did according to his will, and magnified himself.

\bibleverse{5} As I was considering, behold, a male goat came from the
west over the surface of the whole earth, and didn't touch the ground.
The goat had a notable horn between his eyes. \bibleverse{6} He came to
the ram that had the two horns, which I saw standing before the river,
and ran on him in the fury of his power. \bibleverse{7} I saw him come
close to the ram, and he was moved with anger against him, and struck
the ram, and broke his two horns. There was no power in the ram to stand
before him; but he cast him down to the ground and trampled on him.
There was no one who could deliver the ram out of his hand.
\bibleverse{8} The male goat magnified himself exceedingly. When he was
strong, the great horn was broken; and instead of it there came up four
notable horns toward the four winds of the sky.

\bibleverse{9} Out of one of them came out a little horn which grew
exceedingly great---toward the south, and toward the east, and toward
the glorious land. \bibleverse{10} It grew great, even to the army of
the sky; and it cast down some of the army and of the stars to the
ground and trampled on them. \bibleverse{11} Yes, it magnified itself,
even to the prince of the army; and it took away from him the continual
burnt offering, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.
\bibleverse{12} The army was given over to it together with the
continual burnt offering through disobedience. It cast down truth to the
ground, and it did its pleasure and prospered.

\bibleverse{13} Then I heard a holy one speaking; and another holy one
said to that certain one who spoke, ``How long will the vision about the
continual burnt offering, and the disobedience that makes desolate, to
give both the sanctuary and the army to be trodden under foot be?''

\bibleverse{14} He said to me, ``To two thousand and three hundred
evenings and mornings. Then the sanctuary will be cleansed.''

\bibleverse{15} When I, even I Daniel, had seen the vision, I sought to
understand it. Then behold, there stood before me someone with the
appearance of a man. \bibleverse{16} I heard a man's voice between the
banks of the Ulai, which called and said, ``Gabriel, make this man
understand the vision.''

\bibleverse{17} So he came near where I stood; and when he came, I was
frightened, and fell on my face; but he said to me, ``Understand, son of
man, for the vision belongs to the time of the end.''

\bibleverse{18} Now as he was speaking with me, I fell into a deep sleep
with my face toward the ground; but he touched me and set me upright.

\bibleverse{19} He said, ``Behold, I will make you know what will be in
the latter time of the indignation, for it belongs to the appointed time
of the end. \bibleverse{20} The ram which you saw, that had the two
horns, they are the kings of Media and Persia. \bibleverse{21} The rough
male goat is the king of Greece. The great horn that is between his eyes
is the first king. \bibleverse{22} As for that which was broken, in the
place where four stood up, four kingdoms will stand up out of the
nation, but not with his power.

\bibleverse{23} ``In the latter time of their kingdom, when the
transgressors have come to the full, a king of fierce face, and
understanding riddles, will stand up. \bibleverse{24} His power will be
mighty, but not by his own power. He will destroy awesomely, and will
prosper in what he does. He will destroy the mighty ones and the holy
people. \bibleverse{25} Through his policy he will cause deceit to
prosper in his hand. He will magnify himself in his heart, and he will
destroy many in their security. He will also stand up against the prince
of princes, but he will be broken without human hands.

\bibleverse{26} ``The vision of the evenings and mornings which has been
told is true; but seal up the vision, for it belongs to many days to
come.''

\bibleverse{27} I, Daniel, fainted, and was sick for some days. Then I
rose up and did the king's business. I wondered at the vision, but no
one understood it.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{daniel-preocupado-por-una-profecuxeda-de-jeremuxedas-decide-obtener-informaciuxf3n-de-dios-a-travuxe9s-de-una-oraciuxf3n-solemne}{%
\subsection{Daniel, preocupado por una profecía de Jeremías, decide
obtener información de Dios a través de una oración
solemne}\label{daniel-preocupado-por-una-profecuxeda-de-jeremuxedas-decide-obtener-informaciuxf3n-de-dios-a-travuxe9s-de-una-oraciuxf3n-solemne}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} En el primer año de Darío, hijo de Asuero, de la estirpe
de los medos, que fue hecho rey sobre el reino de los caldeos,
\footnote{\textbf{9:1} Dan 5,31} \bibleverse{2} en el primer año de su
reinado, yo, Daniel, comprendí por medio de los libros el número de los
años sobre los cuales vino la palabra de Yahvé\footnote{\textbf{9:2}
  ``Yahvé'' es el nombre propio de Dios, a veces traducido como
  ``\textsc{Señor}'' (en mayúsculas) en otras traducciones.} al profeta
Jeremías para que se cumplieran las desolaciones de Jerusalén, es decir,
setenta años. \footnote{\textbf{9:2} Jer 25,11-12} \bibleverse{3} Puse
mi rostro ante el Señor Dios, para buscarlo mediante la oración y las
súplicas, con ayuno, cilicio y ceniza.

\hypertarget{oraciuxf3n-de-daniel-confesiuxf3n-del-pecado-y-solicitud-de-salvaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Oración de Daniel, confesión del pecado, y solicitud de
salvación}\label{oraciuxf3n-de-daniel-confesiuxf3n-del-pecado-y-solicitud-de-salvaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{4} Oré a Yahvé, mi Dios, e hice confesión, y dije, ``Oh,
Señor, Dios grande y temible, que guarda el pacto y la bondad amorosa
con los que le aman y guardan sus mandamientos, \bibleverse{5} hemos
pecado, y hemos actuado con perversidad, y hemos hecho la maldad, y nos
hemos rebelado, apartándonos de tus preceptos y de tus ordenanzas.
\bibleverse{6} No hemos escuchado a tus siervos los profetas, que
hablaron en tu nombre a nuestros reyes, a nuestros príncipes y a
nuestros padres, y a todo el pueblo de la tierra. \bibleverse{7}
``Señor, a ti te pertenece la justicia, pero a nosotros la confusión de
rostro, como sucede hoy; a los hombres de Judá, a los habitantes de
Jerusalén y a todo Israel, a los que están cerca y a los que están
lejos, por todos los países a los que los has expulsado, a causa de su
prevaricación que han cometido contra ti. \bibleverse{8} Señor, a
nosotros nos corresponde la confusión de rostro, a nuestros reyes, a
nuestros príncipes y a nuestros padres, porque hemos pecado contra ti.
\footnote{\textbf{9:8} Is 43,27} \bibleverse{9} Al Señor, nuestro Dios,
le pertenecen la misericordia y el perdón, porque nos hemos rebelado
contra él. \footnote{\textbf{9:9} Sal 130,4} \bibleverse{10} No hemos
obedecido la voz de Yavé, nuestro Dios, para andar en sus leyes, que él
puso delante de nosotros por medio de sus siervos los profetas.
\bibleverse{11} Sí, todo Israel ha transgredido tu ley, apartándose,
para no obedecer tu voz. ``Por eso se ha derramado sobre nosotros la
maldición y el juramento escritos en la ley de Moisés, siervo de Dios,
porque hemos pecado contra él. \footnote{\textbf{9:11} Deut 28,15-68;
  Lev 26,14-39} \bibleverse{12} Él ha confirmado sus palabras, que
pronunció contra nosotros y contra nuestros jueces que nos juzgaron,
trayendo sobre nosotros un gran mal; pues bajo todo el cielo no se ha
hecho tal cosa como se ha hecho a Jerusalén. \bibleverse{13} Como está
escrito en la ley de Moisés, todo este mal ha caído sobre nosotros. Sin
embargo, no hemos suplicado el favor de Yavé, nuestro Dios, para que nos
convirtamos de nuestras iniquidades y tengamos discernimiento en tu
verdad. \bibleverse{14} Por eso Yahvé ha velado por el mal y lo ha hecho
recaer sobre nosotros; porque Yahvé nuestro Dios es justo en todas sus
obras que realiza, y nosotros no hemos obedecido su voz. \footnote{\textbf{9:14}
  Jer 1,12} \bibleverse{15} ``Ahora bien, Señor, Dios nuestro, que has
sacado a tu pueblo de la tierra de Egipto con mano poderosa y te has
dado a conocer, como hoy, hemos pecado. Hemos actuado con maldad.
\bibleverse{16} Señor, según toda tu justicia, haz que tu ira y tu enojo
se aparten de tu ciudad, Jerusalén, tu monte santo; porque por nuestros
pecados y por las iniquidades de nuestros padres, Jerusalén y tu pueblo
se han convertido en un oprobio para todos los que nos rodean.
\bibleverse{17} ``Ahora, pues, Dios nuestro, escucha la oración de tu
siervo y sus peticiones, y haz brillar tu rostro sobre tu santuario
desolado, por amor al Señor. \bibleverse{18} Dios mío, vuelve tu oído y
escucha. Abre tus ojos y mira nuestras desolaciones, y la ciudad que
lleva tu nombre; porque no presentamos nuestras peticiones ante ti por
nuestra justicia, sino por tus grandes misericordias. \footnote{\textbf{9:18}
  Sal 115,1} \bibleverse{19} Señor, escucha. Señor, perdona. Señor,
escucha y haz. No te demores, por tu bien, Dios mío, porque tu ciudad y
tu pueblo son llamados por tu nombre''. \footnote{\textbf{9:19} Jer 14,9}

\hypertarget{daniel-recibe-la-informaciuxf3n-deseada-de-gabriel-refiriuxe9ndose-a-las-semanas-de-auxf1os-designadas-por-jeremuxedas}{%
\subsection{Daniel recibe la información deseada de Gabriel refiriéndose
a las ``semanas de años'' designadas por
Jeremías}\label{daniel-recibe-la-informaciuxf3n-deseada-de-gabriel-refiriuxe9ndose-a-las-semanas-de-auxf1os-designadas-por-jeremuxedas}}

\bibleverse{20} Mientras hablaba, oraba y confesaba mi pecado y el de mi
pueblo Israel, y presentaba mi súplica ante Yavé, mi Dios, por el monte
santo de mi Dios --- \bibleverse{21} sí, mientras hablaba en oración ---
el hombre Gabriel, a quien había visto en la visión del principio,
siendo hecho volar velozmente, me tocó a la hora de la ofrenda de la
tarde. \footnote{\textbf{9:21} Dan 8,16} \bibleverse{22} Me instruyó y
habló conmigo, y me dijo: ``Daniel, ahora he venido a darte sabiduría y
entendimiento. \bibleverse{23} Al principio de tus peticiones salió el
mandamiento, y he venido a decírtelo, porque eres muy querido. Por
tanto, considera el asunto y entiende la visión.

\bibleverse{24} ``Setenta semanas están decretadas sobre tu pueblo y
sobre tu santa ciudad, para acabar con la desobediencia, para poner fin
a los pecados, para reconciliar la iniquidad, para traer la justicia
eterna, para sellar la visión y la profecía, y para ungir al santísimo.

\bibleverse{25} ``Sabed, pues, y discernid que desde la salida de la
orden de restaurar y edificar Jerusalén hasta el Ungido,\footnote{\textbf{9:25}
  ``Ungido'' también puede traducirse como ``Mesías'' (igual que
  ``Cristo'').} el príncipe, habrá siete semanas y sesenta y dos
semanas. Se construirá de nuevo, con calle y foso, incluso en tiempos
difíciles. \bibleverse{26} Después de las sesenta y dos semanas el
Ungido\footnote{\textbf{9:26} ``Ungido'' también puede traducirse como
  ``Mesías'' (igual que ``Cristo'').} será cortado y no tendrá nada. El
pueblo del príncipe que viene destruirá la ciudad y el santuario. Su fin
será con una inundación, y la guerra será hasta el final. Las
desolaciones están decididas. \footnote{\textbf{9:26} Luc 21,24}
\bibleverse{27} Él hará un pacto firme con muchos durante una semana. A
la mitad de la semana hará cesar el sacrificio y la ofrenda. En el ala
de las abominaciones vendrá uno que hace desolación; y hasta el final
completo decretado, la ira se derramará sobre la desolación.''
\footnote{\textbf{9:27} Dan 12,11; Mat 24,15}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the
offspring of the Medes, who was made king over the realm of the
Chaldeans--- \bibleverse{2} in the first year of his reign I, Daniel,
understood by the books the number of the years about which
Yahweh's\footnote{\textbf{9:2} ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name,
  sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}'' (all caps) in other translations.}
word came to Jeremiah the prophet for the accomplishing of the
desolations of Jerusalem, even seventy years. \bibleverse{3} I set my
face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and petitions, with fasting and
sackcloth and ashes.

\bibleverse{4} I prayed to Yahweh my God, and made confession, and said,

i1 ``Oh, Lord, the great and dreadful God, who keeps covenant and loving
kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments,
\bibleverse{5} we have sinned, and have dealt perversely, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, even turning aside from your precepts and
from your ordinances. \bibleverse{6} We haven't listened to your
servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes,
and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.

i1 \bibleverse{7} ``Lord, righteousness belongs to you, but to us
confusion of face, as it is today; to the men of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, who are near and who are
far off, through all the countries where you have driven them, because
of their trespass that they have trespassed against you. \bibleverse{8}
Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and
to our fathers, because we have sinned against you. \bibleverse{9} To
the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, for we have rebelled
against him. \bibleverse{10} We haven't obeyed Yahweh our God's voice,
to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the
prophets. \bibleverse{11} Yes, all Israel have transgressed your law,
turning aside, that they should not obey your voice.

i1 ``Therefore the curse and the oath written in the law of Moses the
servant of God has been poured out on us, for we have sinned against
him. \bibleverse{12} He has confirmed his words, which he spoke against
us and against our judges who judged us, by bringing on us a great evil;
for under the whole sky, such has not been done as has been done to
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{13} As it is written in the law of Moses, all
this evil has come on us. Yet we have not entreated the favor of Yahweh
our God, that we should turn from our iniquities and have discernment in
your truth. \bibleverse{14} Therefore Yahweh has watched over the evil,
and brought it on us; for Yahweh our God is righteous in all his works
which he does, and we have not obeyed his voice.

i1 \bibleverse{15} ``Now, Lord our God, who has brought your people out
of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and have gotten yourself
renown, as it is today, we have sinned. We have done wickedly.
\bibleverse{16} Lord, according to all your righteousness, please let
your anger and your wrath be turned away from your city Jerusalem, your
holy mountain; because for our sins and for the iniquities of our
fathers, Jerusalem and your people have become a reproach to all who are
around us.

i1 \bibleverse{17} ``Now therefore, our God, listen to the prayer of
your servant and to his petitions, and cause your face to shine on your
sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. \bibleverse{18} My God,
turn your ear and hear. Open your eyes and see our desolations, and the
city which is called by your name; for we do not present our petitions
before you for our righteousness, but for your great mercies' sake.
\bibleverse{19} Lord, hear. Lord, forgive. Lord, listen and do. Don't
defer, for your own sake, my God, because your city and your people are
called by your name.''

\bibleverse{20} While I was speaking, praying, and confessing my sin and
the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before
Yahweh my God for the holy mountain of my God--- \bibleverse{21} yes,
while I was speaking in prayer---the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the
vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about
the time of the evening offering. \bibleverse{22} He instructed me and
talked with me, and said, ``Daniel, I have now come to give you wisdom
and understanding. \bibleverse{23} At the beginning of your petitions
the commandment went out, and I have come to tell you, for you are
greatly beloved. Therefore consider the matter and understand the
vision.

\bibleverse{24} ``Seventy weeks are decreed on your people and on your
holy city, to finish disobedience, to make an end of sins, to make
reconciliation for iniquity, to bring in everlasting righteousness, to
seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.

\bibleverse{25} ``Know therefore and discern that from the going out of
the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem to the Anointed
One,\footnote{\textbf{9:25} ``Anointed One'' can also be translated
  ``Messiah'' (same as ``Christ'').} the prince, will be seven weeks and
sixty-two weeks. It will be built again, with street and moat, even in
troubled times. \bibleverse{26} After the sixty-two weeks the Anointed
One\footnote{\textbf{9:26} ``Anointed One'' can also be translated
  ``Messiah'' (same as ``Christ'').} will be cut off, and will have
nothing. The people of the prince who come will destroy the city and the
sanctuary. Its end will be with a flood, and war will be even to the
end. Desolations are determined. \bibleverse{27} He will make a firm
covenant with many for one week. In the middle of the week he will cause
the sacrifice and the offering to cease. On the wing of abominations
will come one who makes desolate; and even to the decreed full end,
wrath will be poured out on the desolate.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-preparaciuxf3n-de-daniel-para-la-visiona-mediante-el-ayuno}{%
\subsection{La preparación de Daniel para la visiona mediante el
ayuno}\label{la-preparaciuxf3n-de-daniel-para-la-visiona-mediante-el-ayuno}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} En el tercer año de Ciro, rey de Persia, le fue revelado
un mensaje a Daniel, cuyo nombre era Beltsasar; y el mensaje era
verdadero, una gran guerra. Él entendió el mensaje, y tuvo comprensión
de la visión. \footnote{\textbf{10:1} Dan 1,21; Dan 1,7}

\bibleverse{2} En aquellos días yo, Daniel, estuve de luto tres semanas
enteras. \bibleverse{3} No comí nada agradable. Ni carne ni vino
entraron en mi boca. No me ungí en absoluto, hasta que se cumplieron las
tres semanas enteras.

\hypertarget{la-apariencia-exterior-del-mensajero-celestial-efecto-de-la-apariciuxf3n-en-daniel}{%
\subsection{La apariencia exterior del mensajero celestial; Efecto de la
aparición en
Daniel}\label{la-apariencia-exterior-del-mensajero-celestial-efecto-de-la-apariciuxf3n-en-daniel}}

\bibleverse{4} En el día veinticuatro del primer mes, estando yo a la
orilla del gran río, que es Hiddekel, \footnote{\textbf{10:4} Los
  terafines eran ídolos domésticos que podían estar asociados a los
  derechos de herencia de los bienes del hogar.} \bibleverse{5} alcé los
ojos y miré, y he aquí que había un hombre vestido de lino, cuya cintura
estaba adornada con oro puro de Ufaz. \footnote{\textbf{10:5} Ezeq 9,2;
  Apoc 1,13-15} \bibleverse{6} Su cuerpo era también como el berilo, y
su rostro como la apariencia de un relámpago, y sus ojos como antorchas
encendidas. Sus brazos y sus pies eran como el bronce bruñido. La voz de
sus palabras era como la voz de una multitud.

\bibleverse{7} Yo, Daniel, fui el único que vio la visión, pues los
hombres que estaban conmigo no vieron la visión, sino que cayó sobre
ellos un gran temblor y huyeron a esconderse. \bibleverse{8} Así que me
quedé solo y vi esta gran visión. No me quedaban fuerzas, pues mi rostro
se puso pálido como la muerte, y no conservaba ninguna fuerza.
\bibleverse{9} Sin embargo, oí la voz de sus palabras. Cuando oí la voz
de sus palabras, caí en un profundo sueño sobre mi rostro, con la cara
hacia el suelo. \footnote{\textbf{10:9} Dan 8,17-18}

\bibleverse{10} He aquí que una mano me tocó, que me puso de rodillas y
sobre las palmas de las manos.

\hypertarget{mensajes-persuasivos-y-alentadores-del-uxe1ngel}{%
\subsection{Mensajes persuasivos y alentadores del
ángel}\label{mensajes-persuasivos-y-alentadores-del-uxe1ngel}}

\bibleverse{11} Me dijo: ``Daniel, hombre muy amado, entiende las
palabras que te digo, y ponte de pie, porque he sido enviado a ti,
ahora''. Cuando me dijo esta palabra, me puse de pie temblando.

\bibleverse{12} Entonces me dijo: ``No temas, Daniel, porque desde el
primer día que pusiste tu corazón en comprender y en humillarte ante tu
Dios, tus palabras fueron escuchadas. He venido por tus palabras.
\bibleverse{13} Pero el príncipe del reino de Persia me resistió
veintiún días; pero he aquí que Miguel, uno de los principales
príncipes, vino a ayudarme porque me quedé allí con los reyes de Persia.
\footnote{\textbf{10:13} Dan 10,20-21} \bibleverse{14} Ahora he venido
para hacerte entender lo que le sucederá a tu pueblo en los últimos
días, porque la visión es todavía para muchos días.'' \footnote{\textbf{10:14}
  Dan 9,22}

\hypertarget{daniel-fortalecido-en-su-debilidad-por-el-uxe1ngel-anuncio-de-la-lucha-del-mensajero-celestial-con-los-pruxedncipes-de-persia-y-grecia}{%
\subsection{Daniel fortalecido en su debilidad por el ángel; Anuncio de
la lucha del mensajero celestial con los príncipes de Persia y
Grecia}\label{daniel-fortalecido-en-su-debilidad-por-el-uxe1ngel-anuncio-de-la-lucha-del-mensajero-celestial-con-los-pruxedncipes-de-persia-y-grecia}}

\bibleverse{15} Cuando me dijo estas palabras, puse el rostro hacia el
suelo y me quedé mudo. \bibleverse{16} He aquí que uno a semejanza de
los hijos de los hombres tocó mis labios. Entonces abrí mi boca y hablé,
y dije al que estaba delante de mí: ``Señor mío, a causa de la visión
mis dolores me han alcanzado, y no conservo ninguna fuerza. \footnote{\textbf{10:16}
  Is 6,7; Jer 1,9} \bibleverse{17} Pues, ¿cómo puede el siervo de este
mi señor hablar con este mi señor? Pues en cuanto a mí, inmediatamente
no me quedaron fuerzas. No me quedó aliento''.

\bibleverse{18} Entonces uno con apariencia de hombre me tocó de nuevo,
y me fortaleció. \bibleverse{19} Dijo: ``Hombre muy amado, no temas. La
paz sea contigo. Sé fuerte. Sí, sé fuerte''. Cuando me habló, me sentí
fortalecido y dije: ``Deja hablar a mi señor, porque me has
fortalecido''. \footnote{\textbf{10:19} Apoc 1,17}

\bibleverse{20} Entonces dijo: ``¿Sabes por qué he venido a ti? Ahora
volveré para luchar con el príncipe de Persia. Cuando salga, he aquí que
vendrá el príncipe de Grecia. \footnote{\textbf{10:20} Dan 10,13}
\bibleverse{21} Pero os diré lo que está inscrito en la escritura de la
verdad. No hay nadie que sostenga conmigo contra estos sino Miguel, tu
príncipe.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a message was
revealed to Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the message
was true, even a great warfare. He understood the message, and had
understanding of the vision.

\bibleverse{2} In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three whole weeks.
\bibleverse{3} I ate no pleasant food. No meat or wine came into my
mouth. I didn't anoint myself at all, until three whole weeks were
fulfilled.

\bibleverse{4} In the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was by
the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel,\footnote{\textbf{10:4}
  or, Tigris River} \bibleverse{5} I lifted up my eyes and looked, and
behold, there was a man clothed in linen, whose waist was adorned with
pure gold of Uphaz. \bibleverse{6} His body also was like beryl, and his
face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as flaming torches.
His arms and his feet were like burnished bronze. The voice of his words
was like the voice of a multitude.

\bibleverse{7} I, Daniel, alone saw the vision, for the men who were
with me didn't see the vision, but a great quaking fell on them, and
they fled to hide themselves. \bibleverse{8} So I was left alone and saw
this great vision. No strength remained in me; for my face grew deathly
pale, and I retained no strength. \bibleverse{9} Yet I heard the voice
of his words. When I heard the voice of his words, then I fell into a
deep sleep on my face, with my face toward the ground.

\bibleverse{10} Behold, a hand touched me, which set me on my knees and
on the palms of my hands. \bibleverse{11} He said to me, ``Daniel, you
greatly beloved man, understand the words that I speak to you, and stand
upright, for I have been sent to you, now.'' When he had spoken this
word to me, I stood trembling.

\bibleverse{12} Then he said to me, ``Don't be afraid, Daniel; for from
the first day that you set your heart to understand, and to humble
yourself before your God, your words were heard. I have come for your
words' sake. \bibleverse{13} But the prince of the kingdom of Persia
withstood me twenty-one days; but, behold, Michael, one of the chief
princes, came to help me because I remained there with the kings of
Persia. \bibleverse{14} Now I have come to make you understand what will
happen to your people in the latter days, for the vision is yet for many
days.''

\bibleverse{15} When he had spoken these words to me, I set my face
toward the ground and was mute. \bibleverse{16} Behold, one in the
likeness of the sons of men touched my lips. Then I opened my mouth, and
spoke and said to him who stood before me, ``My lord, by reason of the
vision my sorrows have overtaken me, and I retain no strength.
\bibleverse{17} For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this
my lord? For as for me, immediately there remained no strength in me.
There was no breath left in me.''

\bibleverse{18} Then one like the appearance of a man touched me again,
and he strengthened me. \bibleverse{19} He said, ``Greatly beloved man,
don't be afraid. Peace be to you. Be strong. Yes, be strong.''

When he spoke to me, I was strengthened, and said, ``Let my lord speak,
for you have strengthened me.''

\bibleverse{20} Then he said, ``Do you know why I have come to you? Now
I will return to fight with the prince of Persia. When I go out, behold,
the prince of Greece will come. \bibleverse{21} But I will tell you that
which is inscribed in the writing of truth. There is no one who holds
with me against these but Michael your prince.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} ``En cuanto a mí, en el primer año de Darío el Medo, me
levanté para confirmarlo y fortalecerlo.

\bibleverse{2} ``Ahora te mostraré la verdad. He aquí que otros tres
reyes se levantarán en Persia. El cuarto será mucho más rico que todos
ellos. Cuando se haya hecho fuerte gracias a sus riquezas, se alzará
contra el reino de Grecia. \footnote{\textbf{11:2} Dan 10,21}
\bibleverse{3} Se levantará un rey poderoso que gobernará con gran
dominio y hará su voluntad. \bibleverse{4} Cuando se levante, su reino
se romperá y se repartirá hacia los cuatro vientos del cielo, pero no
para su posteridad, ni según su dominio con el que gobernó; porque su
reino será arrancado, incluso para otros además de éstos. \footnote{\textbf{11:4}
  Dan 8,8; Dan 8,22}

\hypertarget{resumen-de-las-batallas-de-los-reyes-egipcios-y-sirios-despuuxe9s-de-la-muerte-de-alejandro-excepto-antuxedoco-epuxedfanes}{%
\subsection{Resumen de las batallas de los reyes egipcios y sirios
después de la muerte de Alejandro, excepto Antíoco
Epífanes}\label{resumen-de-las-batallas-de-los-reyes-egipcios-y-sirios-despuuxe9s-de-la-muerte-de-alejandro-excepto-antuxedoco-epuxedfanes}}

\bibleverse{5} ``El rey del sur se hará fuerte. Uno de sus príncipes se
hará más fuerte que él, y tendrá dominio. Su dominio será un gran
dominio. \bibleverse{6} Al final de los años se unirán; y la hija del
rey del sur vendrá al rey del norte para hacer un acuerdo, pero no
conservará la fuerza de su brazo. Tampoco él se mantendrá en pie, ni su
brazo; sino que ella será entregada, con los que la trajeron, y el que
se hizo padre de ella, y el que la fortaleció en aquellos tiempos.

\bibleverse{7} ``Pero de un brote de sus raíces se levantará uno en su
lugar, que vendrá al ejército y entrará en la fortaleza del rey del
norte, y tratará contra ellos y vencerá. \bibleverse{8} También llevará
cautivos a Egipto a sus dioses con sus imágenes fundidas, y con sus
buenos objetos de plata y de oro. Se abstendrá algunos años del rey del
norte. \bibleverse{9} Llegará al reino del rey del sur, pero volverá a
su tierra. \bibleverse{10} Sus hijos harán la guerra y reunirán una
multitud de grandes fuerzas que vendrán, se desbordarán y pasarán.
Volverán y harán la guerra hasta su fortaleza.

\bibleverse{11} ``El rey del sur se enfurecerá y saldrá a luchar con él,
incluso con el rey del norte. Enviará una gran multitud, y la multitud
será entregada en su mano. \bibleverse{12} La multitud será llevada, y
su corazón será exaltado. Derribará a decenas de miles, pero no
prevalecerá. \bibleverse{13} El rey del norte volverá y enviará una
multitud mayor que la anterior. Vendrá al final de los tiempos, incluso
de los años, con un gran ejército y con abundantes provisiones.

\bibleverse{14} ``En esos tiempos muchos se levantarán contra el rey del
sur. También los hijos de los violentos de tu pueblo se levantarán para
establecer la visión, pero caerán. \bibleverse{15} Entonces el rey del
norte vendrá y levantará un montículo y tomará una ciudad bien
fortificada. Las fuerzas del sur no resistirán, ni sus tropas selectas,
ni habrá fuerza para resistir. \bibleverse{16} Pero el que venga contra
él hará según su voluntad, y nadie podrá resistir ante él. Se parará en
la tierra gloriosa, y la destrucción estará en su mano. \footnote{\textbf{11:16}
  Dan 8,9} \bibleverse{17} Él pondrá su rostro para venir con la fuerza
de todo su reino, y con él condiciones equitativas. Las cumplirá. Le
dará la hija de las mujeres, para destruir el reino, pero ella no se
mantendrá en pie, y no será para él. \bibleverse{18} Después de esto,
volverá su rostro hacia las islas, y tomará a muchos, pero un príncipe
hará que cese el reproche ofrecido por él. Más aún, hará que su reproche
se vuelva contra él. \bibleverse{19} Entonces volverá su rostro hacia
las fortalezas de su propia tierra; pero tropezará y caerá, y no será
encontrado.

\bibleverse{20} ``Entonces se levantará en su lugar uno que hará pasar a
un recaudador de impuestos por el reino para mantener su gloria; pero en
pocos días será destruido, no en la ira ni en la batalla.

\hypertarget{historia-del-malvado-antiochus-epiphanes}{%
\subsection{Historia del malvado Antiochus
Epiphanes}\label{historia-del-malvado-antiochus-epiphanes}}

\bibleverse{21} ``En su lugar se levantará una persona despreciable, a
la que no habían dado el honor del reino; pero vendrá en tiempo de
seguridad, y obtendrá el reino mediante lisonjas. \footnote{\textbf{11:21}
  Dan 8,23} \bibleverse{22} Las fuerzas abrumadoras se verán desbordadas
ante él, y serán quebrantadas. Sí, también el príncipe de la alianza.
\bibleverse{23} Después del tratado hecho con él, obrará con engaño;
porque subirá y se hará fuerte con poca gente. \bibleverse{24} En tiempo
de seguridad vendrá incluso sobre los lugares más gordos de la
provincia. Hará lo que no hicieron sus padres, ni los padres de sus
padres. Esparcirá entre ellos presas, saqueos y riquezas. Sí, ideará sus
planes contra las fortalezas, pero sólo por un tiempo.

\bibleverse{25} ``Él despertará su poder y su coraje contra el rey del
sur con un gran ejército; y el rey del sur entablará la guerra en la
batalla con un ejército sumamente grande y poderoso, pero no resistirá,
porque idearán planes contra él. \bibleverse{26} Sí, los que coman de
sus manjares lo destruirán, y su ejército será barrido. Muchos caerán
muertos. \bibleverse{27} En cuanto a estos dos reyes, su corazón será
para hacer el mal, y hablarán mentiras en una mesa; pero no prosperará,
porque el fin será todavía en el tiempo señalado. \bibleverse{28}
Entonces volverá a su tierra con grandes riquezas. Su corazón estará en
contra del pacto sagrado. Tomará medidas y regresará a su tierra.
\footnote{\textbf{11:28} 1Maca 1,21-29}

\bibleverse{29} ``Volverá al tiempo señalado y entrará en el sur; pero
no será en el último tiempo como en el primero. \bibleverse{30} Porque
vendrán contra él barcos de Kittim. Por tanto, se afligirá, y volverá, y
tendrá indignación contra el santo pacto, y tomará medidas. Incluso
volverá, y tendrá consideración con los que abandonan el santo pacto.

\hypertarget{persecuciuxf3n-de-los-juduxedos-en-jerusaluxe9n}{%
\subsection{Persecución de los judíos en
Jerusalén}\label{persecuciuxf3n-de-los-juduxedos-en-jerusaluxe9n}}

\bibleverse{31} ``Fuerzas de él profanarán el santuario, incluso la
fortaleza, y quitarán el holocausto continuo. Entonces levantarán la
abominación desoladora. \footnote{\textbf{11:31} Dan 9,27; Dan 12,11;
  1Maca 1,57; Mat 24,15} \bibleverse{32} Corromperá con lisonjas a los
que obran con maldad contra el pacto; pero el pueblo que conoce a su
Dios será fuerte y actuará. \footnote{\textbf{11:32} 1Maca 2,1-6}

\bibleverse{33} ``Los sabios del pueblo instruirán a muchos; pero caerán
por la espada y por las llamas, por el cautiverio y por el saqueo,
muchos días. \footnote{\textbf{11:33} Dan 12,3} \bibleverse{34} Cuando
caigan, serán ayudados con un poco de ayuda; pero muchos se unirán a
ellos con lisonjas. \bibleverse{35} Algunos de los sabios caerán, para
refinarlos y purificarlos y emblanquecerlos, hasta el tiempo del fin,
porque todavía es para el tiempo señalado.

\hypertarget{actos-violentos-atropellos-contra-el-culto-juduxedo-y-el-resultado-del-rey-antijuduxedo}{%
\subsection{Actos violentos, atropellos contra el culto judío y el
resultado del rey
antijudío}\label{actos-violentos-atropellos-contra-el-culto-juduxedo-y-el-resultado-del-rey-antijuduxedo}}

\bibleverse{36} ``El rey hará según su voluntad. Se exaltará a sí mismo
y se engrandecerá por encima de todo dios, y hablará cosas maravillosas
contra el Dios de los dioses. Prosperará hasta que se cumpla la
indignación, pues se hará lo que está decidido. \footnote{\textbf{11:36}
  2Tes 2,4; Dan 7,8; Dan 7,25; Apoc 13,5-6} \bibleverse{37} No mirará a
los dioses de sus padres, ni al deseo de las mujeres, ni mirará a ningún
dios, porque se engrandecerá por encima de todos. \footnote{\textbf{11:37}
  1Tim 4,3} \bibleverse{38} Pero en lugar de ellos, honrará al dios de
las fortalezas. Honrará a un dios que sus padres no conocieron con oro,
plata, piedras preciosas y cosas agradables. \bibleverse{39} Se
enfrentará a las fortalezas más fuertes con la ayuda de un dios
extranjero. Aumentará con gloria a quien lo reconozca. Hará que
gobiernen sobre muchos, y repartirá la tierra por un precio.

\bibleverse{40} ``En el tiempo del fin, el rey del sur contenderá con
él; y el rey del norte vendrá contra él como un torbellino, con carros,
con jinetes y con muchos barcos. Entrará en los países, los desbordará y
los atravesará. \bibleverse{41} Entrará también en la tierra gloriosa, y
muchos países serán derribados; pero éstos serán librados de su mano:
Edom, Moab y el jefe de los hijos de Amón. \footnote{\textbf{11:41} Dan
  11,16} \bibleverse{42} También extenderá su mano sobre los países. La
tierra de Egipto no escapará. \bibleverse{43} Pero tendrá poder sobre
los tesoros de oro y de plata, y sobre todas las cosas preciosas de
Egipto. Los libios y los etíopes seguirán sus pasos. \bibleverse{44}
Pero noticias del este y del norte lo perturbarán; y saldrá con gran
furia para destruir y arrasar a muchos. \bibleverse{45} Plantará las
tiendas de su palacio entre el mar y el glorioso monte santo; pero
llegará a su fin, y nadie lo ayudará.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} ``As for me, in the first year of Darius the Mede, I
stood up to confirm and strengthen him.

\bibleverse{2} ``Now I will show you the truth. Behold, three more kings
will stand up in Persia. The fourth will be far richer than all of them.
When he has grown strong through his riches, he will stir up all against
the realm of Greece. \bibleverse{3} A mighty king will stand up, who
will rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.
\bibleverse{4} When he stands up, his kingdom will be broken and will be
divided toward the four winds of the sky, but not to his posterity, nor
according to his dominion with which he ruled; for his kingdom will be
plucked up, even for others besides these.

\bibleverse{5} ``The king of the south will be strong. One of his
princes will become stronger than him, and have dominion. His dominion
will be a great dominion. \bibleverse{6} At the end of years they will
join themselves together; and the daughter of the king of the south will
come to the king of the north to make an agreement, but she will not
retain the strength of her arm. He will also not stand, nor will his
arm; but she will be given up, with those who brought her, and he who
became the father of her, and he who strengthened her in those times.

\bibleverse{7} ``But out of a shoot from her roots one will stand up in
his place, who will come to the army and will enter into the fortress of
the king of the north, and will deal against them and will prevail.
\bibleverse{8} He will also carry their gods with their molten images,
and with their goodly vessels of silver and of gold, captive into Egypt.
He will refrain some years from the king of the north. \bibleverse{9} He
will come into the realm of the king of the south, but he will return
into his own land. \bibleverse{10} His sons will wage war, and will
assemble a multitude of great forces which will come on, and overflow,
and pass through. They will return and wage war, even to his fortress.

\bibleverse{11} ``The king of the south will be moved with anger and
will come out and fight with him, even with the king of the north. He
will send out a great multitude, and the multitude will be given into
his hand. \bibleverse{12} The multitude will be carried off, and his
heart will be exalted. He will cast down tens of thousands, but he won't
prevail. \bibleverse{13} The king of the north will return, and will
send out a multitude greater than the former. He will come on at the end
of the times, even of years, with a great army and with abundant
supplies.

\bibleverse{14} ``In those times many will stand up against the king of
the south. Also the children of the violent among your people will lift
themselves up to establish the vision, but they will fall.
\bibleverse{15} So the king of the north will come and cast up a mound,
and take a well-fortified city. The forces of the south won't stand,
neither will his select troops, neither will there be any strength to
stand. \bibleverse{16} But he who comes against him will do according to
his own will, and no one will stand before him. He will stand in the
glorious land, and destruction will be in his hand. \bibleverse{17} He
will set his face to come with the strength of his whole kingdom, and
with him equitable conditions. He will perform them. He will give him
the daughter of women, to destroy the kingdom, but she will not stand,
and won't be for him. \bibleverse{18} After this he will turn his face
to the islands, and will take many, but a prince will cause the reproach
offered by him to cease. Yes, moreover, he will cause his reproach to
turn on him. \bibleverse{19} Then he will turn his face toward the
fortresses of his own land; but he will stumble and fall, and won't be
found.

\bibleverse{20} ``Then one who will cause a tax collector to pass
through the kingdom to maintain its glory will stand up in his place;
but within few days he shall be destroyed, not in anger, and not in
battle.

\bibleverse{21} ``In his place a contemptible person will stand up, to
whom they had not given the honor of the kingdom; but he will come in
time of security, and will obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
\bibleverse{22} The overwhelming forces will be overwhelmed from before
him, and will be broken. Yes, also the prince of the covenant.
\bibleverse{23} After the treaty made with him he will work deceitfully;
for he will come up and will become strong with few people.
\bibleverse{24} In time of security he will come even on the fattest
places of the province. He will do that which his fathers have not done,
nor his fathers' fathers. He will scatter among them prey, plunder, and
wealth. Yes, he will devise his plans against the strongholds, but only
for a time.

\bibleverse{25} ``He will stir up his power and his courage against the
king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south will wage
war in battle with an exceedingly great and mighty army, but he won't
stand; for they will devise plans against him. \bibleverse{26} Yes,
those who eat of his delicacies will destroy him, and his army will be
swept away. Many will fall down slain. \bibleverse{27} As for both these
kings, their hearts will be to do evil, and they will speak lies at one
table; but it won't prosper, for the end will still be at the appointed
time. \bibleverse{28} Then he will return into his land with great
wealth. His heart will be against the holy covenant. He will take
action, and return to his own land.

\bibleverse{29} ``He will return at the appointed time and come into the
south; but it won't be in the latter time as it was in the former.
\bibleverse{30} For ships of Kittim will come against him. Therefore he
will be grieved, and will return, and have indignation against the holy
covenant, and will take action. He will even return, and have regard to
those who forsake the holy covenant.

\bibleverse{31} ``Forces from him will profane the sanctuary, even the
fortress, and will take away the continual burnt offering. Then they
will set up the abomination that makes desolate. \bibleverse{32} He will
corrupt those who do wickedly against the covenant by flatteries; but
the people who know their God will be strong and take action.

\bibleverse{33} ``Those who are wise among the people will instruct
many; yet they will fall by the sword and by flame, by captivity and by
plunder, many days. \bibleverse{34} Now when they fall, they will be
helped with a little help; but many will join themselves to them with
flatteries. \bibleverse{35} Some of those who are wise will fall---to
refine them, and to purify, and to make them white, even to the time of
the end, because it is yet for the time appointed.

\bibleverse{36} ``The king will do according to his will. He will exalt
himself and magnify himself above every god, and will speak marvelous
things against the God of gods. He will prosper until the indignation is
accomplished, for that which is determined will be done. \bibleverse{37}
He won't regard the gods of his fathers, or the desire of women, or
regard any god; for he will magnify himself above all. \bibleverse{38}
But in their place, he will honor the god of fortresses. He will honor a
god whom his fathers didn't know with gold, silver, and with precious
stones and pleasant things. \bibleverse{39} He will deal with the
strongest fortresses by the help of a foreign god. He will increase with
glory whoever acknowledges him. He will cause them to rule over many,
and will divide the land for a price.

\bibleverse{40} ``At the time of the end the king of the south will
contend with him; and the king of the north will come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, with horsemen, and with many ships. He will
enter into the countries, and will overflow and pass through.
\bibleverse{41} He will enter also into the glorious land, and many
countries will be overthrown; but these will be delivered out of his
hand: Edom, Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.
\bibleverse{42} He will also stretch out his hand on the countries. The
land of Egypt won't escape. \bibleverse{43} But he will have power over
the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of
Egypt. The Libyans and the Ethiopians will follow his steps.
\bibleverse{44} But news out of the east and out of the north will
trouble him; and he will go out with great fury to destroy and utterly
to sweep away many. \bibleverse{45} He will plant the tents of his
palace between the sea and the glorious holy mountain; yet he will come
to his end, and no one will help him.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-amanecer-del-fin-de-los-tiempos-con-su-miseria-su-retribuciuxf3n-y-la-resurrecciuxf3n-de-los-impuxedos-y-de-los-rectos}{%
\subsection{El amanecer del fin de los tiempos con su miseria, su
retribución y la resurrección de los impíos y de los
rectos}\label{el-amanecer-del-fin-de-los-tiempos-con-su-miseria-su-retribuciuxf3n-y-la-resurrecciuxf3n-de-los-impuxedos-y-de-los-rectos}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} ``En aquel tiempo se levantará Miguel, el gran príncipe
que defiende a los hijos de tu pueblo; y habrá un tiempo de angustia,
como nunca lo hubo desde que hubo una nación hasta ese mismo tiempo. En
ese momento tu pueblo será liberado, todos los que se encuentren
escritos en el libro. \footnote{\textbf{12:1} Dan 10,13; Mat 24,21; Éxod
  32,32; Fil 4,3} \bibleverse{2} Muchos de los que duermen en el polvo
de la tierra se despertarán, unos para la vida eterna y otros para la
vergüenza y el desprecio eterno. \footnote{\textbf{12:2} Juan 5,29}
\bibleverse{3} Los que son sabios brillarán como el resplandor de la
expansión. Los que convierten a muchos a la justicia brillarán como las
estrellas por los siglos de los siglos. \footnote{\textbf{12:3} Mat
  13,43; 1Cor 15,41-42}

\hypertarget{comisiuxf3n-del-uxe1ngel-a-daniel-revelaciuxf3n-sobre-la-duraciuxf3n-del-peruxedodo-de-sufrimiento-y-finalmente-una-promesa-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-daniel}{%
\subsection{Comisión del ángel a Daniel; Revelación sobre la duración
del período de sufrimiento; y finalmente una promesa de salvación para
Daniel}\label{comisiuxf3n-del-uxe1ngel-a-daniel-revelaciuxf3n-sobre-la-duraciuxf3n-del-peruxedodo-de-sufrimiento-y-finalmente-una-promesa-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-daniel}}

\bibleverse{4} Pero tú, Daniel, cierra las palabras y sella el libro
hasta el tiempo del fin. Muchos correrán de un lado a otro, y el
conocimiento se incrementará''. \footnote{\textbf{12:4} Dan 12,9; Apoc
  10,4}

\bibleverse{5} Entonces yo, Daniel, miré, y he aquí que otros dos
estaban de pie, uno en la orilla del río de este lado, y el otro en la
orilla del río de aquel lado. \bibleverse{6} Uno de ellos dijo al hombre
vestido de lino, que estaba sobre las aguas del río: ``¿Cuánto tiempo
falta para el fin de estas maravillas?'' \footnote{\textbf{12:6} Dan
  10,5}

\bibleverse{7} Oí al hombre vestido de lino, que estaba sobre las aguas
del río, cuando levantó su mano derecha y su mano izquierda al cielo, y
juró por el que vive para siempre que será por un tiempo, tiempos y
medio; y cuando hayan terminado de romper en pedazos el poder del pueblo
santo, todas estas cosas estarán terminadas. \footnote{\textbf{12:7}
  Apoc 10,5-6; Dan 7,25}

\bibleverse{8} Lo oí, pero no lo entendí. Entonces dije: ``Mi señor,
¿cuál será el resultado de estas cosas?''

\bibleverse{9} Dijo: ``Vete, Daniel, porque las palabras están
encerradas y selladas hasta el tiempo del fin. \bibleverse{10} Muchos se
purificarán, se blanquearán y se refinarán, pero los malvados harán
maldades; y ninguno de los malvados entenderá, sino que los sabios
entenderán.

\bibleverse{11} ``Desde el momento en que se quite el holocausto
continuo y se instale la abominación desoladora, habrá mil doscientos
noventa días. \footnote{\textbf{12:11} Dan 11,31; Mat 24,15}
\bibleverse{12} Bienaventurado el que espera y llega a los mil
trescientos treinta y cinco días.

\bibleverse{13} ``Pero sigue tu camino hasta el final; porque
descansarás y estarás en tu herencia al final de los días''.
\switchcolumn \begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} ``At that time Michael will stand up, the great prince
who stands for the children of your people; and there will be a time of
trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same
time. At that time your people will be delivered, everyone who is found
written in the book. \bibleverse{2} Many of those who sleep in the dust
of the earth will awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt. \bibleverse{3} Those who are wise will shine as
the brightness of the expanse. Those who turn many to righteousness will
shine as the stars forever and ever. \bibleverse{4} But you, Daniel,
shut up the words and seal the book, even to the time of the end. Many
will run back and forth, and knowledge will be increased.''

\bibleverse{5} Then I, Daniel, looked, and behold, two others stood, one
on the river bank on this side, and the other on the river bank on that
side. \bibleverse{6} One said to the man clothed in linen, who was above
the waters of the river, ``How long will it be to the end of these
wonders?''

\bibleverse{7} I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the
waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand to
heaven, and swore by him who lives forever that it will be for a time,
times, and a half; and when they have finished breaking in pieces the
power of the holy people, all these things will be finished.

\bibleverse{8} I heard, but I didn't understand. Then I said, ``My lord,
what will be the outcome of these things?''

\bibleverse{9} He said, ``Go your way, Daniel; for the words are shut up
and sealed until the time of the end. \bibleverse{10} Many will purify
themselves, and make themselves white, and be refined, but the wicked
will do wickedly; and none of the wicked will understand, but those who
are wise will understand.

\bibleverse{11} ``From the time that the continual burnt offering is
taken away and the abomination that makes desolate set up, there will be
one thousand two hundred ninety days. \bibleverse{12} Blessed is he who
waits, and comes to the one thousand three hundred thirty-five days.

\bibleverse{13} ``But go your way until the end; for you will rest, and
will stand in your inheritance at the end of the days.''
\end{otherlanguage} \end{paracol}
