\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-como-el-verbo-hecho-hombre}{%
\subsection{Jesús como el ``Verbo'' hecho
hombre}\label{jesuxfas-como-el-verbo-hecho-hombre}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} En el principio era el Verbo, y el Verbo estaba con Dios,
y el Verbo era Dios. \footnote{\textbf{1:1} Gén 1,1; 1Jn 1,1-2; Juan
  17,5; Apoc 19,13} \bibleverse{2} El mismo estaba en el principio con
Dios. \bibleverse{3} Todas las cosas fueron hechas por medio de él. Sin
él no se hizo nada de lo que se ha hecho. \footnote{\textbf{1:3} 1Cor
  8,6; Col 1,16-17; Heb 1,2} \bibleverse{4} En él estaba la vida, y la
vida era la luz de los hombres. \footnote{\textbf{1:4} Juan 8,12}
\bibleverse{5} La luz brilla en las tinieblas, y las tinieblas no la han
vencido. \footnote{\textbf{1:5} Juan 3,19}

\bibleverse{6} Vino un hombre enviado por Dios, que se llamaba Juan.
\footnote{\textbf{1:6} Mat 3,1; Mar 1,4} \bibleverse{7} Este vino como
testigo, para dar testimonio de la luz, a fin de que todos creyeran por
medio de él. \footnote{\textbf{1:7} Hech 19,4} \bibleverse{8} Él no era
la luz, sino que fue enviado para dar testimonio de la luz.
\bibleverse{9} Existía la verdadera luz que ilumina a todo hombre, venía
a este mundo.

\bibleverse{10} Estaba en el mundo, y el mundo fue hecho por medio de
él, y el mundo no lo reconoció. \bibleverse{11} Vino a los suyos, y los
suyos no le recibieron. \bibleverse{12} Pero a todos los que le
recibieron, les dio el derecho de ser hijos de Dios, a los que creen en
su nombre: \footnote{\textbf{1:12} Gal 3,26} \bibleverse{13} que no
nacieron de la sangre, ni de la voluntad de la carne, ni de la voluntad
del hombre, sino de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{1:13} Juan 3,5-6}

\bibleverse{14} El Verbo se hizo carne y vivió entre nosotros. Vimos su
gloria, una gloria como la del Hijo unigénito del Padre, lleno de gracia
y de verdad. \footnote{\textbf{1:14} Is 7,14; Is 60,1; 2Pe 1,16-17}
\bibleverse{15} Juan dio testimonio de él. Gritó diciendo: ``Este era
aquel de quien dije: ``El que viene después de mí me ha superado, porque
era antes que yo''\,''. \bibleverse{16} De su plenitud todos hemos
recibido gracia sobre gracia. \footnote{\textbf{1:16} Juan 3,34; Col
  1,19} \bibleverse{17} Porque la ley fue dada por medio de Moisés. La
gracia y la verdad se realizaron por medio de Jesucristo. \footnote{\textbf{1:17}
  Rom 10,4} \bibleverse{18} Nadie ha visto a Dios en ningún momento. El
Hijo único, que está en el seno del Padre, lo ha declarado. \footnote{\textbf{1:18}
  Juan 6,46; Mat 11,27}

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-suxed-mismo-del-bautista}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de sí mismo del
Bautista}\label{el-testimonio-de-suxed-mismo-del-bautista}}

\bibleverse{19} Este es el testimonio de Juan, cuando los judíos
enviaron sacerdotes y levitas de Jerusalén para preguntarle: ``¿Quién
eres tú?''

\bibleverse{20} Declaró, y no negó, pero declaró: ``Yo no soy el
Cristo''.

\bibleverse{21} Le preguntaron: ``¿Entonces qué? ¿Eres tú Elías?'' Él
dijo: ``No lo soy''. ``¿Eres el profeta?'' Él respondió: ``No''.
\footnote{\textbf{1:21} Mat 17,10-13; Deut 18,15; Mal 4,5}

\bibleverse{22} Le dijeron entonces: ``¿Quién eres tú? Danos una
respuesta para llevarla a los que nos han enviado. ¿Qué dices de ti
mismo?''

\bibleverse{23} Dijo: ``Soy la voz del que clama en el desierto:
``Enderezad el camino del Señor'', como dijo el profeta Isaías''.

\bibleverse{24} Los enviados eran de los fariseos. \bibleverse{25} Le
preguntaron: ``¿Por qué, pues, bautizas si no eres el Cristo, ni Elías,
ni el profeta?''.

\bibleverse{26} Juan les respondió: ``Yo bautizo en agua, pero entre
vosotros hay uno que no conocéis. \footnote{\textbf{1:26} Luc 17,21}
\bibleverse{27} Él es el que viene después de mí, el que es preferido
antes que yo, cuya correa de sandalia no soy digno de desatar.''
\bibleverse{28} Estas cosas sucedieron en Betania, al otro lado del
Jordán, donde Juan bautizaba.

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-del-bautista-acerca-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{El testimonio del Bautista acerca de
Jesús}\label{el-testimonio-del-bautista-acerca-de-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{29} Al día siguiente, vio a Jesús que se acercaba a él, y
dijo: ``¡He aquí el Cordero de Dios, que quita el pecado del mundo!
\footnote{\textbf{1:29} Is 53,7} \bibleverse{30} Este es aquel de quien
dije: ``Después de mí viene un hombre que es preferido antes que yo,
porque fue antes que yo''. \bibleverse{31} Yo no lo conocía, pero por
eso vine a bautizar en agua, para que fuera revelado a Israel.''
\bibleverse{32} Juan dio testimonio diciendo: ``He visto al Espíritu
descender del cielo como una paloma, y permaneció sobre él.
\bibleverse{33} Yo no lo reconocí, pero el que me envió a bautizar en
agua me dijo: `Sobre quien veas descender el Espíritu y permanecer sobre
él es el que bautiza en el Espíritu Santo'. \bibleverse{34} He visto y
he dado testimonio de que éste es el Hijo de Dios''.

\bibleverse{35} Al día siguiente, Juan estaba de pie con dos de sus
discípulos, \bibleverse{36} y mirando a Jesús mientras caminaba, dijo:
``¡He aquí el Cordero de Dios!'' \bibleverse{37} Los dos discípulos le
oyeron hablar y siguieron a Jesús. \bibleverse{38} Jesús se volvió y, al
ver que le seguían, les dijo: ``¿Qué buscáis?'' Le dijeron: ``Rabí''
(que se interpreta como Maestro), ``¿dónde te alojas?''.

\bibleverse{39} Les dijo: ``Vengan y vean''. Vinieron y vieron dónde se
alojaba, y se quedaron con él ese día. Era como la hora décima.
\bibleverse{40} Uno de los que oyeron a Juan y le siguieron fue Andrés,
hermano de Simón Pedro. \footnote{\textbf{1:40} Mat 4,18-20}
\bibleverse{41} Este encontró primero a su propio hermano, Simón, y le
dijo: ``¡Hemos encontrado al Mesías!'' (que es, interpretado, Cristo).
\bibleverse{42} Lo llevó a Jesús. Jesús lo miró y le dijo: ``Tú eres
Simón, hijo de Jonás. Seras llamado Cefas'' (que es, por interpretación,
Pedro). \footnote{\textbf{1:42} Mat 16,18}

\bibleverse{43} Al día siguiente, decidido a salir a Galilea, encontró a
Felipe. Jesús le dijo: ``Sígueme''. \bibleverse{44} Felipe era de
Betsaida, la ciudad de Andrés y Pedro. \bibleverse{45} Felipe encontró a
Natanael y le dijo: ``Hemos encontrado a aquel de quien escribió Moisés
en la ley y también los profetas: Jesús de Nazaret, hijo de José''.
\footnote{\textbf{1:45} Deut 18,18; Is 53,2; Jer 23,5; Ezeq 34,23}

\bibleverse{46} Natanael le dijo: ``¿Puede salir algo bueno de
Nazaret?'' Felipe le dijo: ``Ven a ver''. \footnote{\textbf{1:46} Juan
  7,41}

\bibleverse{47} Jesús vio que Natanael se acercaba a él, y dijo de él:
``¡He aquí un verdadero israelita, en quien no hay engaño!''

\bibleverse{48} Natanael le dijo: ``¿De qué me conoces?'' Jesús le
respondió: ``Antes de que Felipe te llamara, cuando estabas debajo de la
higuera, te vi''.

\bibleverse{49} Natanael le respondió: ``¡Rabí, tú eres el Hijo de Dios!
Tú eres el Rey de Israel''. \footnote{\textbf{1:49} Sal 2,7; Jer 23,5;
  Juan 6,69; Mat 14,33; Mat 16,16}

\bibleverse{50} Jesús le respondió: ``Porque te he dicho que te he visto
debajo de la higuera, ¿crees? Verás cosas más grandes que éstas''.
\bibleverse{51} Le dijo: ``Te aseguro que después verás el cielo abierto
y a los ángeles de Dios subiendo y bajando sobre el Hijo del Hombre.''
\footnote{\textbf{1:51} Gén 28,12; Mat 4,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. \bibleverse{2} The same was in the beginning with
God. \bibleverse{3} All things were made through him. Without him,
nothing was made that has been made. \bibleverse{4} In him was life, and
the life was the light of men. \bibleverse{5} The light shines in the
darkness, and the darkness hasn't overcome\footnote{\textbf{1:5} The
  word translated ``overcome'' (\greek{κατέλαβεν}) can also be
  translated ``comprehended.'' It refers to getting a grip on an enemy
  to defeat him.} it.

\bibleverse{6} There came a man sent from God, whose name was John.
\bibleverse{7} The same came as a witness, that he might testify about
the light, that all might believe through him. \bibleverse{8} He was not
the light, but was sent that he might testify about the light.
\bibleverse{9} The true light that enlightens everyone was coming into
the world.

\bibleverse{10} He was in the world, and the world was made through him,
and the world didn't recognize him. \bibleverse{11} He came to his own,
and those who were his own didn't receive him. \bibleverse{12} But as
many as received him, to them he gave the right to become God's
children, to those who believe in his name: \bibleverse{13} who were
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God.

\bibleverse{14} The Word became flesh and lived among us. We saw his
glory, such glory as of the only born\footnote{\textbf{1:14} The phrase
  ``only born'' is from the Greek word ``\greek{μονογενους}'', which is
  sometimes translated ``only begotten'' or ``one and only''.} Son of
the Father, full of grace and truth. \bibleverse{15} John testified
about him. He cried out, saying, ``This was he of whom I said, `He who
comes after me has surpassed me, for he was before me.'\,''
\bibleverse{16} From his fullness we all received grace upon grace.
\bibleverse{17} For the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth
were realized through Jesus Christ.\footnote{\textbf{1:17} ``Christ''
  means ``Anointed One''.} \bibleverse{18} No one has seen God at any
time. The only born\footnote{\textbf{1:18} The phrase ``only born'' is
  from the Greek word ``\greek{μονογενη}'', which is sometimes
  translated ``only begotten'' or ``one and only''.} Son,\footnote{\textbf{1:18}
  NU reads ``God''} who is in the bosom of the Father, has declared him.

\bibleverse{19} This is John's testimony, when the Jews sent priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, ``Who are you?''

\bibleverse{20} He declared, and didn't deny, but he declared, ``I am
not the Christ.''

\bibleverse{21} They asked him, ``What then? Are you Elijah?''

He said, ``I am not.''

``Are you the prophet?''

He answered, ``No.''

\bibleverse{22} They said therefore to him, ``Who are you? Give us an
answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say about
yourself?''

\bibleverse{23} He said, ``I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, `Make straight the way of the Lord,'\footnote{\textbf{1:23}
  Isaiah 40:3} as Isaiah the prophet said.''

\bibleverse{24} The ones who had been sent were from the Pharisees.
\bibleverse{25} They asked him, ``Why then do you baptize if you are not
the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?''

\bibleverse{26} John answered them, ``I baptize in water, but among you
stands one whom you don't know. \bibleverse{27} He is the one who comes
after me, who is preferred before me, whose sandal strap I'm not worthy
to loosen.'' \bibleverse{28} These things were done in Bethany beyond
the Jordan, where John was baptizing.

\bibleverse{29} The next day, he saw Jesus coming to him, and said,
``Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:29} ``Behold'', from ``\greek{ἰδοὺ}'',
  means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used
  as an interjection.} the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the
world! \bibleverse{30} This is he of whom I said, `After me comes a man
who is preferred before me, for he was before me.' \bibleverse{31} I
didn't know him, but for this reason I came baptizing in water, that he
would be revealed to Israel.'' \bibleverse{32} John testified, saying,
``I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it
remained on him. \bibleverse{33} I didn't recognize him, but he who sent
me to baptize in water said to me, `On whomever you will see the Spirit
descending and remaining on him is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.'
\bibleverse{34} I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of
God.''

\bibleverse{35} Again, the next day, John was standing with two of his
disciples, \bibleverse{36} and he looked at Jesus as he walked, and
said, ``Behold, the Lamb of God!'' \bibleverse{37} The two disciples
heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. \bibleverse{38} Jesus turned
and saw them following, and said to them, ``What are you looking for?''

They said to him, ``Rabbi'' (which is to say, being interpreted,
Teacher), ``where are you staying?''

\bibleverse{39} He said to them, ``Come and see.''

They came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that
day. It was about the tenth hour.\footnote{\textbf{1:39} 4:00 p. m.}
\bibleverse{40} One of the two who heard John and followed him was
Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. \bibleverse{41} He first found his own
brother, Simon, and said to him, ``We have found the Messiah!'' (which
is, being interpreted, Christ\footnote{\textbf{1:41} ``Messiah''
  (Hebrew) and ``Christ'' (Greek) both mean ``Anointed One''.} ).
\bibleverse{42} He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said,
``You are Simon the son of Jonah. You shall be called Cephas'' (which is
by interpretation, Peter).\footnote{\textbf{1:42} ``Cephas'' (Aramaic)
  and ``Peter'' (Greek) both mean ``Rock''.}

\bibleverse{43} On the next day, he was determined to go out into
Galilee, and he found Philip. Jesus said to him, ``Follow me.''
\bibleverse{44} Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and
Peter. \bibleverse{45} Philip found Nathanael, and said to him, ``We
have found him of whom Moses in the law and also the prophets, wrote:
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.''

\bibleverse{46} Nathanael said to him, ``Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth?''

Philip said to him, ``Come and see.''

\bibleverse{47} Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said about him,
``Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!''

\bibleverse{48} Nathanael said to him, ``How do you know me?''

Jesus answered him, ``Before Philip called you, when you were under the
fig tree, I saw you.''

\bibleverse{49} Nathanael answered him, ``Rabbi, you are the Son of God!
You are King of Israel!''

\bibleverse{50} Jesus answered him, ``Because I told you, `I saw you
underneath the fig tree,' do you believe? You will see greater things
than these!'' \bibleverse{51} He said to him, ``Most certainly, I tell
you all, hereafter you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God
ascending and descending on the Son of Man.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-primera-seuxf1al-milagrosa-de-jesuxfas-en-las-bodas-de-canuxe1}{%
\subsection{La primera señal milagrosa de Jesús en las bodas de
Caná}\label{la-primera-seuxf1al-milagrosa-de-jesuxfas-en-las-bodas-de-canuxe1}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Al tercer día, hubo una boda en Caná de Galilea. La madre
de Jesús estaba allí. \bibleverse{2} También Jesús fue invitado, con sus
discípulos, a la boda. \bibleverse{3} Cuando se acabó el vino, la madre
de Jesús le dijo: ``No tienen vino''.

\bibleverse{4} Jesús le dijo: ``Mujer, ¿qué tiene que ver eso contigo y
conmigo? Todavía no ha llegado mi hora''. \footnote{\textbf{2:4} Juan
  19,26}

\bibleverse{5} Su madre dijo a los criados: ``Haced lo que os diga''.

\bibleverse{6} Había allí seis vasijas de piedra, colocadas según la
costumbre judía de purificar, que contenían dos o tres metretes cada
una. \footnote{\textbf{2:6} Mar 7,3-4} \bibleverse{7} Jesús les dijo:
``Llenen de agua las tinajas''. Así que las llenaron hasta el borde.
\bibleverse{8} Les dijo: ``Sacad ahora un poco y llevadlo al jefe de la
fiesta.'' Así que lo tomaron. \bibleverse{9} Cuando el dueño del
banquete probó el agua convertida en vino, y no sabía de dónde procedía
(pero los criados que habían sacado el agua sí lo sabían), el dueño del
banquete llamó al novio \bibleverse{10} y le dijo: ``Servid todos
primero el vino bueno, y cuando los invitados hayan bebido libremente,
entonces el que es peor. Tú has guardado el vino bueno hasta ahora''.
\bibleverse{11} Este principio de sus milagros lo hizo Jesús en Caná de
Galilea, y reveló su gloria; y sus discípulos creyeron en él.
\footnote{\textbf{2:11} Juan 1,14}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-por-primera-vez-en-jerusaluxe9n-en-la-pascua}{%
\subsection{Jesús por primera vez en Jerusalén en la
Pascua}\label{jesuxfas-por-primera-vez-en-jerusaluxe9n-en-la-pascua}}

\bibleverse{12} Después de esto, bajó a Capernaúm, él y su madre, sus
hermanos y sus discípulos; y se quedaron allí unos días. \footnote{\textbf{2:12}
  Juan 7,3; Mat 13,55}

\bibleverse{13} Se acercaba la Pascua de los judíos, y Jesús subió a
Jerusalén. \footnote{\textbf{2:13} Mat 20,18; Mar 11,1; Luc 19,28; Juan
  5,1} \bibleverse{14} Encontró en el templo a los que vendían bueyes,
ovejas y palomas, y a los cambistas sentados. \bibleverse{15} Hizo un
látigo de cuerdas y expulsó a todos del templo, tanto a las ovejas como
a los bueyes; y a los cambistas les derramó el dinero y derribó sus
mesas. \bibleverse{16} A los que vendían las palomas les dijo: ``¡Sacad
esto de aquí! No hagáis de la casa de mi Padre un mercado''.
\bibleverse{17} Sus discípulos recordaron que estaba escrito: ``El celo
por tu casa me consumirá''.

\bibleverse{18} Los judíos le respondieron: ``¿Qué señal nos muestras,
ya que haces estas cosas?'' \footnote{\textbf{2:18} Mat 21,3}

\bibleverse{19} Jesús les respondió: ``Destruyan este templo y en tres
días lo levantaré''. \footnote{\textbf{2:19} Mat 26,61; Mat 27,40}

\bibleverse{20} Los judíos, por tanto, dijeron: ``¡Se necesitaron
cuarenta y seis años para construir este templo! ¿Lo levantarás en tres
días?'' \bibleverse{21} Pero él hablaba del templo de su cuerpo.
\footnote{\textbf{2:21} 1Cor 6,19} \bibleverse{22} Por eso, cuando
resucitó de entre los muertos, sus discípulos se acordaron de que había
dicho esto, y creyeron en la Escritura y en la palabra que Jesús había
dicho. \footnote{\textbf{2:22} Os 6,2}

\bibleverse{23} Estando en Jerusalén en la Pascua, durante la fiesta,
muchos creyeron en su nombre, observando las señales que hacía.
\bibleverse{24} Pero Jesús no se confió a ellos, porque conocía a todos,
\bibleverse{25} y porque no necesitaba que nadie diera testimonio acerca
del hombre, pues él mismo sabía lo que había en el hombre. \footnote{\textbf{2:25}
  Mar 2,8}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} The third day, there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee.
Jesus' mother was there. \bibleverse{2} Jesus also was invited, with his
disciples, to the wedding. \bibleverse{3} When the wine ran out, Jesus'
mother said to him, ``They have no wine.''

\bibleverse{4} Jesus said to her, ``Woman, what does that have to do
with you and me? My hour has not yet come.''

\bibleverse{5} His mother said to the servants, ``Whatever he says to
you, do it.''

\bibleverse{6} Now there were six water pots of stone set there after
the Jews' way of purifying, containing two or three metretes\footnote{\textbf{2:6}
  2 to 3 metretes is about 20 to 30 U. S. Gallons, or 75 to 115 liters.}
apiece. \bibleverse{7} Jesus said to them, ``Fill the water pots with
water.'' So they filled them up to the brim. \bibleverse{8} He said to
them, ``Now draw some out, and take it to the ruler of the feast.'' So
they took it. \bibleverse{9} When the ruler of the feast tasted the
water now become wine, and didn't know where it came from (but the
servants who had drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast called
the bridegroom \bibleverse{10} and said to him, ``Everyone serves the
good wine first, and when the guests have drunk freely, then that which
is worse. You have kept the good wine until now!'' \bibleverse{11} This
beginning of his signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and revealed his
glory; and his disciples believed in him.

\bibleverse{12} After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his
mother, his brothers, and his disciples; and they stayed there a few
days.

\bibleverse{13} The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up
to Jerusalem. \bibleverse{14} He found in the temple those who sold
oxen, sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting.
\bibleverse{15} He made a whip of cords and drove all out of the temple,
both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the changers' money and
overthrew their tables. \bibleverse{16} To those who sold the doves, he
said, ``Take these things out of here! Don't make my Father's house a
marketplace!'' \bibleverse{17} His disciples remembered that it was
written, ``Zeal for your house will eat me up.''\footnote{\textbf{2:17}
  Psalm 69:9}

\bibleverse{18} The Jews therefore answered him, ``What sign do you show
us, seeing that you do these things?''

\bibleverse{19} Jesus answered them, ``Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will raise it up.''

\bibleverse{20} The Jews therefore said, ``It took forty-six years to
build this temple! Will you raise it up in three days?'' \bibleverse{21}
But he spoke of the temple of his body. \bibleverse{22} When therefore
he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this,
and they believed the Scripture and the word which Jesus had said.

\bibleverse{23} Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the
feast, many believed in his name, observing his signs which he did.
\bibleverse{24} But Jesus didn't entrust himself to them, because he
knew everyone, \bibleverse{25} and because he didn't need for anyone to
testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-y-nicodemo}{%
\subsection{Jesús y Nicodemo}\label{jesuxfas-y-nicodemo}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Había un hombre de los fariseos que se llamaba Nicodemo,
jefe de los judíos. \footnote{\textbf{3:1} Juan 7,50; Juan 19,39}
\bibleverse{2} Se acercó a Jesús de noche y le dijo: ``Rabí, sabemos que
eres un maestro venido de Dios, porque nadie puede hacer estas señales
que tú haces, si no está Dios con él.''

\bibleverse{3} Jesús le contestó: ``Te aseguro que si uno no nace de
nuevo, no puede ver el Reino de Dios''. \footnote{\textbf{3:3} 1Pe 1,23}

\bibleverse{4} Nicodemo le dijo: ``¿Cómo puede un hombre nacer siendo
viejo? ¿Puede entrar por segunda vez en el vientre de su madre y
nacer?''

\bibleverse{5} Jesús respondió: ``En verdad os digo que el que no nazca
del agua y del Espíritu, no puede entrar en el Reino de Dios.
\footnote{\textbf{3:5} Ezeq 36,25-27; Mat 3,11; Tit 3,5} \bibleverse{6}
Lo que nace de la carne es carne. Lo que nace del Espíritu es espíritu.
\footnote{\textbf{3:6} Juan 1,13; Rom 8,5-9} \bibleverse{7} No os
extrañéis de que os haya dicho: ``Tenéis que nacer de nuevo''.
\bibleverse{8} El viento sopla donde quiere, y vosotros oís su sonido,
pero no sabéis de dónde viene ni a dónde va. Así es todo el que nace del
Espíritu''.

\bibleverse{9} Nicodemo le respondió: ``¿Cómo puede ser esto?''

\bibleverse{10} Jesús le respondió: ``¿Eres tú el maestro de Israel y no
entiendes estas cosas? \bibleverse{11} De cierto te digo que hablamos lo
que sabemos y damos testimonio de lo que hemos visto, y no recibís
nuestro testimonio. \bibleverse{12} Si os he dicho cosas terrenales y no
creéis, ¿cómo creeréis si os digo cosas celestiales? \bibleverse{13}
Nadie ha subido al cielo sino el que descendió del cielo, el Hijo del
Hombre, que está en el cielo. \bibleverse{14} Como Moisés levantó la
serpiente en el desierto, así debe ser levantado el Hijo del Hombre,
\footnote{\textbf{3:14} Núm 21,8-9} \bibleverse{15} para que todo el que
crea en él no perezca, sino que tenga vida eterna. \bibleverse{16}
Porque tanto amó Dios al mundo, que dio a su Hijo unigénito, para que
todo el que crea en él no perezca, sino que tenga vida eterna.
\footnote{\textbf{3:16} Rom 5,8; Rom 8,32; 1Jn 4,9} \bibleverse{17}
Porque Dios no envió a su Hijo al mundo para juzgar al mundo, sino para
que el mundo se salve por él. \footnote{\textbf{3:17} Luc 19,10}
\bibleverse{18} El que cree en él no es juzgado. El que no cree ya ha
sido juzgado, porque no ha creído en el nombre del Hijo único de Dios.
\footnote{\textbf{3:18} Juan 5,24} \bibleverse{19} Esta es la sentencia:
la luz vino al mundo, y los hombres amaron más las tinieblas que la luz,
porque sus obras eran malas. \footnote{\textbf{3:19} Juan 1,5; Juan
  1,9-11} \bibleverse{20} Porque todo el que hace el mal odia la luz y
no viene a la luz, para que sus obras no sean expuestas. \footnote{\textbf{3:20}
  Efes 5,13} \bibleverse{21} Pero el que hace la verdad viene a la luz,
para que se revelen sus obras, que han sido hechas en Dios.''
\footnote{\textbf{3:21} 1Jn 1,6}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-en-judea-y-el-testimonio-final-del-bautista}{%
\subsection{Jesús en Judea y el testimonio final del
Bautista}\label{jesuxfas-en-judea-y-el-testimonio-final-del-bautista}}

\bibleverse{22} Después de estas cosas, Jesús vino con sus discípulos a
la tierra de Judea. Se quedó allí con ellos y bautizó. \footnote{\textbf{3:22}
  Juan 4,1-2} \bibleverse{23} También Juan bautizaba en Enón, cerca de
Salim, porque allí había mucha agua. Vinieron y se bautizaron;
\bibleverse{24} porque Juan no había sido aún encarcelado. \footnote{\textbf{3:24}
  Mar 1,14} \bibleverse{25} Entonces surgió una disputa por parte de los
discípulos de Juan con algunos judíos sobre la purificación.
\bibleverse{26} Se acercaron a Juan y le dijeron: ``Rabí, el que estaba
contigo al otro lado del Jordán, del que has dado testimonio, he aquí
que bautiza, y todo el mundo acude a él.'' \footnote{\textbf{3:26} Juan
  1,26-34}

\bibleverse{27} Juan respondió: ``El hombre no puede recibir nada si no
le ha sido dado del cielo. \footnote{\textbf{3:27} Heb 5,4}
\bibleverse{28} Vosotros mismos dais testimonio de que yo he dicho: ``Yo
no soy el Cristo'', sino: ``He sido enviado antes que él''. \footnote{\textbf{3:28}
  Juan 1,20; Juan 1,23; Juan 1,27} \bibleverse{29} El que tiene la novia
es el novio; pero el amigo del novio, que está de pie y lo escucha, se
alegra mucho por la voz del novio. Por eso mi alegría es plena.
\footnote{\textbf{3:29} Mat 9,15} \bibleverse{30} Él debe aumentar, pero
yo debo disminuir.

\bibleverse{31} ``El que viene de arriba está por encima de todo. El que
es de la tierra pertenece a la tierra y habla de la tierra. El que viene
del cielo está por encima de todo. \footnote{\textbf{3:31} Juan 8,23}
\bibleverse{32} Lo que ha visto y oído, de eso da testimonio; y nadie
recibe su testimonio. \bibleverse{33} El que ha recibido su testimonio
ha puesto su sello en esto: que Dios es verdadero. \bibleverse{34}
Porque el que Dios ha enviado habla las palabras de Dios; pues Dios da
el Espíritu sin medida. \footnote{\textbf{3:34} Juan 1,16}
\bibleverse{35} El Padre ama al Hijo y ha entregado todas las cosas en
su mano. \footnote{\textbf{3:35} Juan 5,20; Mat 11,27} \bibleverse{36}
El que cree en el Hijo tiene vida eterna, pero el que desobedece al Hijo
no verá la vida, sino que la ira de Dios permanece sobre él.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a
ruler of the Jews. \bibleverse{2} He came to Jesus by night and said to
him, ``Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one
can do these signs that you do, unless God is with him.''

\bibleverse{3} Jesus answered him, ``Most certainly I tell you, unless
one is born anew, \footnote{\textbf{3:3} The word translated ``anew''
  here and in John 3:7 (\greek{ἄνωθεν}) also means ``again'' and ``from
  above''.} he can't see God's Kingdom.''

\bibleverse{4} Nicodemus said to him, ``How can a man be born when he is
old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born?''

\bibleverse{5} Jesus answered, ``Most certainly I tell you, unless one
is born of water and Spirit, he can't enter into God's Kingdom.
\bibleverse{6} That which is born of the flesh is flesh. That which is
born of the Spirit is spirit. \bibleverse{7} Don't marvel that I said to
you, `You must be born anew.' \bibleverse{8} The wind\footnote{\textbf{3:8}
  The same Greek word (\greek{πνεῦμα}) means wind, breath, and spirit.}
blows where it wants to, and you hear its sound, but don't know where it
comes from and where it is going. So is everyone who is born of the
Spirit.''

\bibleverse{9} Nicodemus answered him, ``How can these things be?''

\bibleverse{10} Jesus answered him, ``Are you the teacher of Israel, and
don't understand these things? \bibleverse{11} Most certainly I tell
you, we speak that which we know and testify of that which we have seen,
and you don't receive our witness. \bibleverse{12} If I told you earthly
things and you don't believe, how will you believe if I tell you
heavenly things? \bibleverse{13} No one has ascended into heaven but he
who descended out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven.
\bibleverse{14} As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even
so must the Son of Man be lifted up, \bibleverse{15} that whoever
believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
\bibleverse{16} For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
born\footnote{\textbf{3:16} The phrase ``only born'' is from the Greek
  word ``\greek{μονογενη}'', which is sometimes translated ``only
  begotten'' or ``one and only''.} Son, that whoever believes in him
should not perish, but have eternal life. \bibleverse{17} For God didn't
send his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world
should be saved through him. \bibleverse{18} He who believes in him is
not judged. He who doesn't believe has been judged already, because he
has not believed in the name of the only born Son of God.
\bibleverse{19} This is the judgment, that the light has come into the
world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works
were evil. \bibleverse{20} For everyone who does evil hates the light
and doesn't come to the light, lest his works would be exposed.
\bibleverse{21} But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his
works may be revealed, that they have been done in God.''

\bibleverse{22} After these things, Jesus came with his disciples into
the land of Judea. He stayed there with them and baptized.
\bibleverse{23} John also was baptizing in Enon near Salim, because
there was much water there. They came and were baptized; \bibleverse{24}
for John was not yet thrown into prison. \bibleverse{25} Therefore a
dispute arose on the part of John's disciples with some Jews about
purification. \bibleverse{26} They came to John and said to him,
``Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have
testified, behold, he baptizes, and everyone is coming to him.''

\bibleverse{27} John answered, ``A man can receive nothing unless it has
been given him from heaven. \bibleverse{28} You yourselves testify that
I said, `I am not the Christ,' but, `I have been sent before him.'
\bibleverse{29} He who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend
of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of
the bridegroom's voice. Therefore my joy is made full. \bibleverse{30}
He must increase, but I must decrease.

\bibleverse{31} ``He who comes from above is above all. He who is from
the earth belongs to the earth and speaks of the earth. He who comes
from heaven is above all. \bibleverse{32} What he has seen and heard, of
that he testifies; and no one receives his witness. \bibleverse{33} He
who has received his witness has set his seal to this, that God is true.
\bibleverse{34} For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for
God gives the Spirit without measure. \bibleverse{35} The Father loves
the Son, and has given all things into his hand. \bibleverse{36} One who
believes in the Son has eternal life, but one who disobeys\footnote{\textbf{3:36}
  The same word can be translated ``disobeys'' or ``disbelieves'' in
  this context.} the Son won't see life, but the wrath of God remains on
him.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-habla-con-la-mujer-samaritana-junto-al-pozo-de-jacob}{%
\subsection{Jesús habla con la mujer samaritana junto al pozo de
Jacob}\label{jesuxfas-habla-con-la-mujer-samaritana-junto-al-pozo-de-jacob}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} Por eso, cuando el Señor supo que los fariseos habían
oído que Jesús hacía y bautizaba más discípulos que Juan \footnote{\textbf{4:1}
  Juan 3,22; Juan 3,26} \bibleverse{2} (aunque Jesús mismo no bautizaba,
sino sus discípulos), \bibleverse{3} abandonó Judea y partió hacia
Galilea. \bibleverse{4} Tenía que pasar por Samaria. \bibleverse{5} Y
llegó a una ciudad de Samaria llamada Sicar, cerca de la parcela que
Jacob dio a su hijo José. \footnote{\textbf{4:5} Gén 48,22; Jos 24,32}
\bibleverse{6} Allí estaba el pozo de Jacob. Jesús, cansado del viaje,
se sentó junto al pozo. Era como la hora sexta.

\bibleverse{7} Una mujer de Samaria vino a sacar agua. Jesús le dijo:
``Dame de beber''. \bibleverse{8} Porque sus discípulos habían ido a la
ciudad a comprar comida.

\bibleverse{9} La samaritana le dijo entonces: ``¿Cómo es que tú, siendo
judío, me pides de beber a una samaritana?'' (Porque los judíos no
tienen trato con los samaritanos). \footnote{\textbf{4:9} Luc 9,52-53}

\bibleverse{10} Jesús le contestó: ``Si conocieras el don de Dios y
quién es el que te dice: ``Dame de beber'', se lo habrías pedido a él y
te habría dado agua viva.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:10} Juan 7,38-39}

\bibleverse{11} La mujer le dijo: ``Señor, no tienes con qué sacar, y el
pozo es profundo. ¿De dónde sacas esa agua viva? \bibleverse{12} ¿Acaso
eres más grande que nuestro padre Jacob, que nos dio el pozo y él mismo
bebió de él, al igual que sus hijos y su ganado?''

\bibleverse{13} Jesús le contestó: ``Todo el que beba de esta agua
volverá a tener sed, \footnote{\textbf{4:13} Juan 6,58} \bibleverse{14}
pero el que beba del agua que yo le daré no volverá a tener sed, sino
que el agua que yo le daré se convertirá en él en una fuente de agua que
salta hasta la vida eterna.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:14} Juan 6,35; Juan
  7,38-39}

\bibleverse{15} La mujer le dijo: ``Señor, dame esta agua, para que no
tenga sed ni venga hasta aquí a sacar''.

\bibleverse{16} Jesús le dijo: ``Ve, llama a tu marido y ven aquí''.

\bibleverse{17} La mujer respondió: ``No tengo marido''. Jesús le dijo:
``Has dicho bien: ``No tengo marido'', \bibleverse{18} porque has tenido
cinco maridos; y el que ahora tienes no es tu marido. Esto lo has dicho
con verdad''.

\bibleverse{19} La mujer le dijo: ``Señor, me doy cuenta de que eres un
profeta. \bibleverse{20} Nuestros padres adoraban en este monte, y
vosotros los judíos decís que en Jerusalén es el lugar donde se debe
adorar.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:20} Deut 12,5; Sal 122,1}

\bibleverse{21} Jesús le dijo: ``Mujer, créeme, que llega la hora en que
ni en este monte ni en Jerusalén adoraréis al Padre. \bibleverse{22}
Vosotros adoráis lo que no conocéis. Nosotros adoramos lo que conocemos,
porque la salvación viene de los judíos. \footnote{\textbf{4:22} 2Re
  17,29-41; Is 2,3} \bibleverse{23} Pero viene la hora, y ahora es,
cuando los verdaderos adoradores adorarán al Padre en espíritu y en
verdad, porque el Padre busca a los tales para que sean sus adoradores.
\bibleverse{24} Dios es espíritu, y los que lo adoran deben hacerlo en
espíritu y en verdad.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:24} Rom 12,1; 2Cor 3,17}

\bibleverse{25} La mujer le dijo: ``Sé que viene el Mesías, el que se
llama Cristo. Cuando haya venido, nos declarará todas las cosas''.
\footnote{\textbf{4:25} Juan 1,41}

\bibleverse{26} Jesús le dijo: ``Yo soy el que te habla''.

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-y-los-discuxedpulos}{%
\subsection{Jesús y los discípulos}\label{jesuxfas-y-los-discuxedpulos}}

\bibleverse{27} En ese momento llegaron sus discípulos. Se maravillaron
de que hablara con una mujer; pero nadie dijo: ``¿Qué buscas?'' o ``¿Por
qué hablas con ella?''. \bibleverse{28} Entonces la mujer dejó su
cántaro, se fue a la ciudad y dijo a la gente: \bibleverse{29} ``Venid a
ver a un hombre que me ha contado todo lo que he hecho. ¿Será éste el
Cristo?'' \bibleverse{30} Salieron de la ciudad y se acercaron a él.

\bibleverse{31} Mientras tanto, los discípulos le urgían diciendo:
``Rabí, come''.

\bibleverse{32} Pero él les dijo: ``Tengo que comer algo que vosotros no
sabéis''.

\bibleverse{33} Entonces los discípulos se dijeron unos a otros:
``¿Alguien le ha traído algo de comer?''

\bibleverse{34} Jesús les dijo: ``Mi comida es hacer la voluntad del que
me envió y cumplir su obra. \footnote{\textbf{4:34} Juan 6,38; Juan 17,4}
\bibleverse{35} ¿No decís que aún faltan cuatro meses para la cosecha?
Pues os digo que levantéis los ojos y miréis los campos, que ya están
blancos para la cosecha. \footnote{\textbf{4:35} Mat 9,37}
\bibleverse{36} El que cosecha recibe el salario y recoge el fruto para
la vida eterna, para que tanto el que siembra como el que cosecha se
alegren juntos. \bibleverse{37} Porque en esto es cierto el dicho: ``Uno
siembra y otro cosecha''. \bibleverse{38} Yo os he enviado a cosechar lo
que no habéis trabajado. Otros han trabajado, y tú has entrado en su
trabajo''.

\bibleverse{39} De aquella ciudad muchos samaritanos creyeron en él por
la palabra de la mujer, que testificó: ``Me ha dicho todo lo que he
hecho.'' \bibleverse{40} Así que los samaritanos se acercaron a él y le
rogaron que se quedara con ellos. Se quedó allí dos días.
\bibleverse{41} Muchos más creyeron gracias a su palabra.
\bibleverse{42} Dijeron a la mujer: ``Ahora creemos, no por lo que tú
dices; porque hemos oído por nosotros mismos, y sabemos que éste es
verdaderamente el Cristo, el Salvador del mundo.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:42}
  Hech 8,5-8}

\hypertarget{curaciuxf3n-del-hijo-de-un-funcionario-real-en-cafarnauxfam}{%
\subsection{Curación del hijo de un funcionario real en
Cafarnaúm}\label{curaciuxf3n-del-hijo-de-un-funcionario-real-en-cafarnauxfam}}

\bibleverse{43} Después de los dos días, salió de allí y se fue a
Galilea. \footnote{\textbf{4:43} Mat 4,12} \bibleverse{44} Porque el
mismo Jesús dio testimonio de que un profeta no tiene honor en su propia
tierra. \footnote{\textbf{4:44} Mat 13,57} \bibleverse{45} Cuando llegó
a Galilea, los galileos le recibieron, habiendo visto todo lo que hacía
en Jerusalén en la fiesta, pues también ellos habian ido a la fiesta.
\footnote{\textbf{4:45} Juan 2,23} \bibleverse{46} Vino, pues, Jesús de
nuevo a Caná de Galilea, donde convirtió el agua en vino. Había un noble
cuyo hijo estaba enfermo en Capernaúm. \footnote{\textbf{4:46} Juan 2,1;
  Juan 2,9} \bibleverse{47} Cuando se enteró de que Jesús había salido
de Judea a Galilea, fue a él y le rogó que bajara a curar a su hijo,
porque estaba a punto de morir. \bibleverse{48} Entonces Jesús le dijo:
``Si no ves señales y prodigios, de ninguna manera creerás''.
\footnote{\textbf{4:48} Juan 2,18; 1Cor 1,22}

\bibleverse{49} El noble le dijo: ``Señor, baja antes de que muera mi
hijo''.

\bibleverse{50} Jesús le dijo: ``Vete. Tu hijo vive''. El hombre creyó
en la palabra que Jesús le había dicho, y se fue. \bibleverse{51}
Mientras bajaba, sus siervos le salieron al encuentro y le informaron
diciendo: ``¡Tu hijo vive!'' \bibleverse{52} Entonces les preguntó a qué
hora había empezado a mejorar. Ellos le dijeron: ``Ayer, a la hora
séptima, le dejó la fiebre''. \bibleverse{53} Así que el padre supo que
fue a esa hora cuando Jesús le dijo: ``Tu hijo vive''. Creyó, al igual
que toda su casa. \bibleverse{54} Esta es también la segunda señal que
hizo Jesús, habiendo salido de Judea a Galilea. \footnote{\textbf{4:54}
  Juan 2,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard
that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John
\bibleverse{2} (although Jesus himself didn't baptize, but his
disciples), \bibleverse{3} he left Judea and departed into Galilee.
\bibleverse{4} He needed to pass through Samaria. \bibleverse{5} So he
came to a city of Samaria called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that
Jacob gave to his son Joseph. \bibleverse{6} Jacob's well was there.
Jesus therefore, being tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It
was about the sixth hour.\footnote{\textbf{4:6} noon}

\bibleverse{7} A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her,
``Give me a drink.'' \bibleverse{8} For his disciples had gone away into
the city to buy food.

\bibleverse{9} The Samaritan woman therefore said to him, ``How is it
that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?''
(For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)

\bibleverse{10} Jesus answered her, ``If you knew the gift of God, and
who it is who says to you, `Give me a drink,' you would have asked him,
and he would have given you living water.''

\bibleverse{11} The woman said to him, ``Sir, you have nothing to draw
with, and the well is deep. So where do you get that living water?
\bibleverse{12} Are you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the
well and drank from it himself, as did his children and his livestock?''

\bibleverse{13} Jesus answered her, ``Everyone who drinks of this water
will thirst again, \bibleverse{14} but whoever drinks of the water that
I will give him will never thirst again; but the water that I will give
him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.''

\bibleverse{15} The woman said to him, ``Sir, give me this water, so
that I don't get thirsty, neither come all the way here to draw.''

\bibleverse{16} Jesus said to her, ``Go, call your husband, and come
here.''

\bibleverse{17} The woman answered, ``I have no husband.''

Jesus said to her, ``You said well, `I have no husband,' \bibleverse{18}
for you have had five husbands; and he whom you now have is not your
husband. This you have said truly.''

\bibleverse{19} The woman said to him, ``Sir, I perceive that you are a
prophet. \bibleverse{20} Our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you
Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to worship.''

\bibleverse{21} Jesus said to her, ``Woman, believe me, the hour is
coming when neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship
the Father. \bibleverse{22} You worship that which you don't know. We
worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews.
\bibleverse{23} But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshipers
will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such
to be his worshipers. \bibleverse{24} God is spirit, and those who
worship him must worship in spirit and truth.''

\bibleverse{25} The woman said to him, ``I know that Messiah is coming,
he who is called Christ.\footnote{\textbf{4:25} ``Messiah'' (Hebrew) and
  ``Christ'' (Greek) both mean ``Anointed One''.} When he has come, he
will declare to us all things.''

\bibleverse{26} Jesus said to her, ``I am he, the one who speaks to
you.''

\bibleverse{27} Just then, his disciples came. They marveled that he was
speaking with a woman; yet no one said, ``What are you looking for?''
or, ``Why do you speak with her?'' \bibleverse{28} So the woman left her
water pot, went away into the city, and said to the people,
\bibleverse{29} ``Come, see a man who told me everything that I have
done. Can this be the Christ?'' \bibleverse{30} They went out of the
city, and were coming to him.

\bibleverse{31} In the meanwhile, the disciples urged him, saying,
``Rabbi, eat.''

\bibleverse{32} But he said to them, ``I have food to eat that you don't
know about.''

\bibleverse{33} The disciples therefore said to one another, ``Has
anyone brought him something to eat?''

\bibleverse{34} Jesus said to them, ``My food is to do the will of him
who sent me and to accomplish his work. \bibleverse{35} Don't you say,
`There are yet four months until the harvest?' Behold, I tell you, lift
up your eyes and look at the fields, that they are white for harvest
already. \bibleverse{36} He who reaps receives wages and gathers fruit
to eternal life, that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice
together. \bibleverse{37} For in this the saying is true, `One sows, and
another reaps.' \bibleverse{38} I sent you to reap that for which you
haven't labored. Others have labored, and you have entered into their
labor.''

\bibleverse{39} From that city many of the Samaritans believed in him
because of the word of the woman, who testified, ``He told me everything
that I have done.'' \bibleverse{40} So when the Samaritans came to him,
they begged him to stay with them. He stayed there two days.
\bibleverse{41} Many more believed because of his word. \bibleverse{42}
They said to the woman, ``Now we believe, not because of your speaking;
for we have heard for ourselves, and know that this is indeed the
Christ, the Savior of the world.''

\bibleverse{43} After the two days he went out from there and went into
Galilee. \bibleverse{44} For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has
no honor in his own country. \bibleverse{45} So when he came into
Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he
did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.
\bibleverse{46} Jesus came therefore again to Cana of Galilee, where he
made the water into wine. There was a certain nobleman whose son was
sick at Capernaum. \bibleverse{47} When he heard that Jesus had come out
of Judea into Galilee, he went to him and begged him that he would come
down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. \bibleverse{48}
Jesus therefore said to him, ``Unless you see signs and wonders, you
will in no way believe.''

\bibleverse{49} The nobleman said to him, ``Sir, come down before my
child dies.''

\bibleverse{50} Jesus said to him, ``Go your way. Your son lives.'' The
man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way.
\bibleverse{51} As he was going down, his servants met him and reported,
saying ``Your child lives!'' \bibleverse{52} So he inquired of them the
hour when he began to get better. They said therefore to him,
``Yesterday at the seventh hour,\footnote{\textbf{4:52} 1:00 p. m.} the
fever left him.'' \bibleverse{53} So the father knew that it was at that
hour in which Jesus said to him, ``Your son lives.'' He believed, as did
his whole house. \bibleverse{54} This is again the second sign that
Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{sanaciuxf3n-de-los-enfermos-en-el-estanque-de-betesda-cerca-de-jerusaluxe9n-y-concurso-del-suxe1bado}{%
\subsection{Sanación de los enfermos en el estanque de Betesda cerca de
Jerusalén y concurso del
sábado}\label{sanaciuxf3n-de-los-enfermos-en-el-estanque-de-betesda-cerca-de-jerusaluxe9n-y-concurso-del-suxe1bado}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Después de estas cosas, hubo una fiesta de los judíos, y
Jesús subió a Jerusalén. \footnote{\textbf{5:1} Juan 2,13}
\bibleverse{2} En Jerusalén, junto a la puerta de las ovejas, hay un
estanque llamado en hebreo ``Betesda'', que tiene cinco pórticos.
\footnote{\textbf{5:2} Neh 3,1} \bibleverse{3} En ellos yacía una gran
multitud de enfermos, ciegos, cojos o paralíticos, esperando que se
moviera el agua; \bibleverse{4} porque un ángel bajaba a ciertas horas
al estanque y agitaba el agua. El que entraba primero después de agitar
el agua quedaba curado de cualquier enfermedad que tuviera.
\bibleverse{5} Estaba allí un hombre que llevaba treinta y ocho años
enfermo. \bibleverse{6} Cuando Jesús lo vio allí tendido, y supo que
llevaba mucho tiempo enfermo, le preguntó: ``¿Quieres curarte?''

\bibleverse{7} El enfermo le respondió: ``Señor, no tengo a nadie que me
meta en la piscina cuando se agita el agua, pero mientras vengo, otro
baja antes que yo.''

\bibleverse{8} Jesús le dijo: ``Levántate, toma tu estera y anda''.

\bibleverse{9} Al instante, el hombre quedó sano, tomó su estera y
caminó. Ese día era sábado. \bibleverse{10} Así que los judíos le
dijeron al que estaba curado: ``Es sábado. No te es lícito llevar la
estera''. \footnote{\textbf{5:10} Jer 17,21-22}

\bibleverse{11} Él les contestó: ``El que me curó me dijo: ``Toma tu
estera y camina''\,''.

\bibleverse{12} Entonces le preguntaron: ``¿Quién es el hombre que te ha
dicho: ``Coge tu estera y anda''?''

\bibleverse{13} Pero el que había sido curado no sabía quién era, porque
Jesús se había retirado, ya que había una multitud en el lugar.

\bibleverse{14} Después, Jesús lo encontró en el templo y le dijo:
``Mira, has quedado bien. No peques más, para que no te ocurra nada
peor''. \footnote{\textbf{5:14} Juan 8,11}

\bibleverse{15} El hombre se fue y contó a los judíos que era Jesús
quien lo había curado. \bibleverse{16} Por eso los judíos persiguieron a
Jesús y trataron de matarlo, porque hacía estas cosas en sábado.
\footnote{\textbf{5:16} Mat 12,14} \bibleverse{17} Pero Jesús les
respondió: ``Mi Padre sigue trabajando, así que yo también trabajo''.
\footnote{\textbf{5:17} Juan 9,4}

\bibleverse{18} Por eso los judíos procuraban matarlo aún más, porque no
sólo quebrantaba el sábado, sino que llamaba a Dios su propio Padre,
haciéndose igual a Dios. \footnote{\textbf{5:18} Juan 7,30; Juan 10,33}

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-de-su-obra-divina-y-de-su-filiaciuxf3n-divina-jesuxfas-como-juez-y-dador-de-vida}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de Jesús de su obra divina y de su filiación
divina; Jesús como juez y dador de
vida}\label{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-de-su-obra-divina-y-de-su-filiaciuxf3n-divina-jesuxfas-como-juez-y-dador-de-vida}}

\bibleverse{19} Entonces Jesús les respondió: ``Os aseguro que el Hijo
no puede hacer nada por sí mismo, sino lo que ve hacer al Padre. Porque
todo lo que él hace, también lo hace el Hijo. \footnote{\textbf{5:19}
  Juan 3,11; Juan 3,32} \bibleverse{20} Porque el Padre tiene afecto por
el Hijo, y le muestra todas las cosas que él mismo hace. Le mostrará
obras mayores que éstas, para que os maravilléis. \footnote{\textbf{5:20}
  Juan 3,35} \bibleverse{21} Porque como el Padre resucita a los muertos
y les da vida, así también el Hijo da vida a quien quiere.
\bibleverse{22} Porque el Padre no juzga a nadie, sino que ha dado todo
el juicio al Hijo, \footnote{\textbf{5:22} Dan 7,12; Dan 7,14; Hech
  10,42} \bibleverse{23} para que todos honren al Hijo como honran al
Padre. El que no honra al Hijo no honra al Padre que lo envió.
\footnote{\textbf{5:23} Fil 2,10-11; 1Jn 2,23}

\bibleverse{24} ``De cierto os digo que el que oye mi palabra y cree al
que me ha enviado tiene vida eterna, y no entra en juicio, sino que ha
pasado de la muerte a la vida. \footnote{\textbf{5:24} Juan 3,16; Juan
  3,18} \bibleverse{25} De cierto os digo que llega la hora, y ya es, en
que los muertos oirán la voz del Hijo de Dios, y los que la oigan
vivirán. \footnote{\textbf{5:25} Efes 2,5-6} \bibleverse{26} Porque como
el Padre tiene vida en sí mismo, así también le dio al Hijo que tenga
vida en sí mismo. \footnote{\textbf{5:26} Juan 1,1-4} \bibleverse{27}
También le dio autoridad para ejecutar el juicio, porque es el Hijo del
hombre. \footnote{\textbf{5:27} Dan 7,13-14} \bibleverse{28} No os
maravilléis de esto, porque llega la hora en que todos los que están en
los sepulcros oirán su voz \bibleverse{29} y saldrán; los que han hecho
el bien, a la resurrección de la vida; y los que han hecho el mal, a la
resurrección del juicio. \footnote{\textbf{5:29} Dan 12,2; Mat 25,46;
  2Cor 5,10} \bibleverse{30} Yo no puedo hacer nada por mí mismo. Según
oigo, juzgo; y mi juicio es justo, porque no busco mi propia voluntad,
sino la voluntad de mi Padre que me ha enviado. \footnote{\textbf{5:30}
  Juan 6,38}

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-juan}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de Juan}\label{el-testimonio-de-juan}}

\bibleverse{31} ``Si yo testifico de mí mismo, mi testimonio no es
válido. \bibleverse{32} Es otro el que testifica sobre mí. Sé que el
testimonio que da sobre mí es verdadero. \bibleverse{33} Tú has enviado
a Juan, y él ha dado testimonio de la verdad. \footnote{\textbf{5:33}
  Juan 1,19-34} \bibleverse{34} Pero el testimonio que yo recibo no
proviene de un hombre. Sin embargo, digo estas cosas para que os
salvéis. \bibleverse{35} Él era la lámpara que ardía y brillaba, y
vosotros quisisteis regocijaros por un tiempo en su luz.

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-del-padre}{%
\subsection{El testimonio del padre}\label{el-testimonio-del-padre}}

\bibleverse{36} Pero el testimonio que yo tengo es mayor que el de Juan;
porque las obras que el Padre me dio para realizar, las mismas obras que
yo hago, dan testimonio de mí, de que el Padre me ha enviado.
\footnote{\textbf{5:36} Juan 3,2; Juan 10,25; Juan 10,38}
\bibleverse{37} El Padre mismo, que me ha enviado, ha dado testimonio de
mí. Vosotros no habéis oído su voz en ningún momento, ni habéis visto su
forma. \footnote{\textbf{5:37} Mat 3,17} \bibleverse{38} No tenéis su
palabra viviendo en vosotros, porque no creéis al que él ha enviado.

\bibleverse{39} ``Escudriñáis las Escrituras, porque pensáis que en
ellas tenéis la vida eterna; y éstas son las que dan testimonio de mí.
\footnote{\textbf{5:39} Luc 24,27; Luc 24,44; 2Tim 3,15-17}
\bibleverse{40} Pero no queréis venir a mí para tener vida.

\hypertarget{ataque-a-la-incredulidad-y-ambiciuxf3n-de-los-juduxedos-testimonio-de-moisuxe9s}{%
\subsection{Ataque a la incredulidad y ambición de los judíos;
Testimonio de
moisés}\label{ataque-a-la-incredulidad-y-ambiciuxf3n-de-los-juduxedos-testimonio-de-moisuxe9s}}

\bibleverse{41} Yo no recibo la gloria de los hombres. \bibleverse{42}
Pero yo os conozco, que no tenéis el amor de Dios en vosotros mismos.
\bibleverse{43} Yo he venido en nombre de mi Padre, y no me recibís. Si
otro viene en su propio nombre, lo recibiréis. \footnote{\textbf{5:43}
  Mat 24,5} \bibleverse{44} ¿Cómo podéis creer, que recibís la gloria
unos de otros, y no buscáis la gloria que viene del único Dios?
\footnote{\textbf{5:44} Juan 12,42-43; 1Tes 2,6}

\bibleverse{45} ``No creas que te voy a acusar ante el Padre. Hay uno
que os acusa, incluso Moisés, en quien habéis puesto vuestra esperanza.
\footnote{\textbf{5:45} Deut 31,26-27} \bibleverse{46} Porque si
creyerais a Moisés, me creeríais a mí, pues él escribió sobre mí.
\footnote{\textbf{5:46} Gén 3,15; Gén 49,10; Deut 18,15} \bibleverse{47}
Perosi no creéis en sus escritos, ¿cómo vais a creer en mis palabras?''
\footnote{\textbf{5:47} Luc 16,31}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, there was a feast of the Jews, and
Jesus went up to Jerusalem. \bibleverse{2} Now in Jerusalem by the sheep
gate, there is a pool, which is called in Hebrew, ``Bethesda'', having
five porches. \bibleverse{3} In these lay a great multitude of those who
were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the
water; \bibleverse{4} for an angel went down at certain times into the
pool and stirred up the water. Whoever stepped in first after the
stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease he had.\footnote{\textbf{5:4}
  NU omits from ``waiting'' in verse 3 to the end of verse 4.}
\bibleverse{5} A certain man was there who had been sick for
thirty-eight years. \bibleverse{6} When Jesus saw him lying there, and
knew that he had been sick for a long time, he asked him, ``Do you want
to be made well?''

\bibleverse{7} The sick man answered him, ``Sir, I have no one to put me
into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I'm coming,
another steps down before me.''

\bibleverse{8} Jesus said to him, ``Arise, take up your mat, and walk.''

\bibleverse{9} Immediately, the man was made well, and took up his mat
and walked.

Now that day was a Sabbath. \bibleverse{10} So the Jews said to him who
was cured, ``It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to carry the
mat.''

\bibleverse{11} He answered them, ``He who made me well said to me,
`Take up your mat and walk.'\,''

\bibleverse{12} Then they asked him, ``Who is the man who said to you,
`Take up your mat and walk'?''

\bibleverse{13} But he who was healed didn't know who it was, for Jesus
had withdrawn, a crowd being in the place.

\bibleverse{14} Afterward Jesus found him in the temple and said to him,
``Behold, you are made well. Sin no more, so that nothing worse happens
to you.''

\bibleverse{15} The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus
who had made him well. \bibleverse{16} For this cause the Jews
persecuted Jesus and sought to kill him, because he did these things on
the Sabbath. \bibleverse{17} But Jesus answered them, ``My Father is
still working, so I am working, too.''

\bibleverse{18} For this cause therefore the Jews sought all the more to
kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath, but also called God his
own Father, making himself equal with God. \bibleverse{19} Jesus
therefore answered them, ``Most certainly, I tell you, the Son can do
nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father doing. For whatever
things he does, these the Son also does likewise. \bibleverse{20} For
the Father has affection for the Son, and shows him all things that he
himself does. He will show him greater works than these, that you may
marvel. \bibleverse{21} For as the Father raises the dead and gives them
life, even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires.
\bibleverse{22} For the Father judges no one, but he has given all
judgment to the Son, \bibleverse{23} that all may honor the Son, even as
they honor the Father. He who doesn't honor the Son doesn't honor the
Father who sent him.

\bibleverse{24} ``Most certainly I tell you, he who hears my word and
believes him who sent me has eternal life, and doesn't come into
judgment, but has passed out of death into life. \bibleverse{25} Most
certainly I tell you, the hour comes, and now is, when the dead will
hear the Son of God's voice; and those who hear will live.
\bibleverse{26} For as the Father has life in himself, even so he gave
to the Son also to have life in himself. \bibleverse{27} He also gave
him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man.
\bibleverse{28} Don't marvel at this, for the hour comes in which all
who are in the tombs will hear his voice \bibleverse{29} and will come
out; those who have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those
who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment. \bibleverse{30} I
can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge; and my judgment is
righteous, because I don't seek my own will, but the will of my Father
who sent me.

\bibleverse{31} ``If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid.
\bibleverse{32} It is another who testifies about me. I know that the
testimony which he testifies about me is true. \bibleverse{33} You have
sent to John, and he has testified to the truth. \bibleverse{34} But the
testimony which I receive is not from man. However, I say these things
that you may be saved. \bibleverse{35} He was the burning and shining
lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light.
\bibleverse{36} But the testimony which I have is greater than that of
John; for the works which the Father gave me to accomplish, the very
works that I do, testify about me, that the Father has sent me.
\bibleverse{37} The Father himself, who sent me, has testified about me.
You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form.
\bibleverse{38} You don't have his word living in you, because you don't
believe him whom he sent.

\bibleverse{39} ``You search the Scriptures, because you think that in
them you have eternal life; and these are they which testify about me.
\bibleverse{40} Yet you will not come to me, that you may have life.
\bibleverse{41} I don't receive glory from men. \bibleverse{42} But I
know you, that you don't have God's love in yourselves. \bibleverse{43}
I have come in my Father's name, and you don't receive me. If another
comes in his own name, you will receive him. \bibleverse{44} How can you
believe, who receive glory from one another, and you don't seek the
glory that comes from the only God?

\bibleverse{45} ``Don't think that I will accuse you to the Father.
There is one who accuses you, even Moses, on whom you have set your
hope. \bibleverse{46} For if you believed Moses, you would believe me;
for he wrote about me. \bibleverse{47} But if you don't believe his
writings, how will you believe my words?''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-alimenta-a-los-cinco-mil}{%
\subsection{Jesús alimenta a los cinco
mil}\label{jesuxfas-alimenta-a-los-cinco-mil}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Después de estas cosas, Jesús se fue al otro lado del mar
de Galilea, que también se llama mar de Tiberíades. \bibleverse{2} Le
seguía una gran multitud, porque veían las señales que hacía con los
enfermos. \bibleverse{3} Jesús subió al monte y se sentó allí con sus
discípulos. \bibleverse{4} Se acercaba la Pascua, la fiesta de los
judíos. \footnote{\textbf{6:4} Juan 2,13; Juan 11,55} \bibleverse{5}
Entonces Jesús, alzando los ojos y viendo que se acercaba a él una gran
multitud, dijo a Felipe: ``¿Dónde vamos a comprar pan para que estos
coman?'' \bibleverse{6} Decía esto para ponerle a prueba, pues él mismo
sabía lo que iba a hacer.

\bibleverse{7} Felipe le respondió: ``No les basta con doscientos
denarios de pan, para que cada uno reciba un poco.''

\bibleverse{8} Uno de sus discípulos, Andrés, hermano de Simón Pedro, le
dijo: \bibleverse{9} ``Hay aquí un muchacho que tiene cinco panes de
cebada y dos peces, pero ¿qué son éstos entre tantos?''

\bibleverse{10} Jesús dijo: ``Que la gente se siente''. Había mucha
hierba en aquel lugar. Así que los hombres se sentaron, en número de
unos cinco mil. \bibleverse{11} Jesús tomó los panes, y habiendo dado
gracias, repartió a los discípulos, y los discípulos a los que estaban
sentados, asimismo de los peces cuanto quisieron. \bibleverse{12} Cuando
se saciaron, dijo a sus discípulos: ``Recoged los trozos que han
sobrado, para que no se pierda nada.'' \bibleverse{13} Así que los
recogieron y llenaron doce cestas con los trozos de los cinco panes de
cebada que habían sobrado a los que habían comido. \bibleverse{14} Al
ver la gente la señal que Jesús había hecho, dijeron: ``Este es
verdaderamente el profeta que viene al mundo.'' \footnote{\textbf{6:14}
  Deut 18,15} \bibleverse{15} Jesús, pues, percibiendo que iban a venir
a prenderle por la fuerza para hacerle rey, se retiró de nuevo al monte,
a solas. \footnote{\textbf{6:15} Juan 18,36}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-camina-sobre-el-lago}{%
\subsection{Jesús camina sobre el
lago}\label{jesuxfas-camina-sobre-el-lago}}

\bibleverse{16} Al atardecer, sus discípulos bajaron al mar.
\bibleverse{17} Entraron en la barca y atravesaron el mar hacia
Capernaum. Ya había oscurecido, y Jesús no había llegado hasta ellos.
\bibleverse{18} El mar estaba agitado por un gran viento que soplaba.
\bibleverse{19} Por lo tanto, cuando habían remado unos veinticinco o
treinta estadios, vieron a Jesús que caminaba sobre el mar y se acercaba
a la barca; y tuvieron miedo. \bibleverse{20} Pero él les dijo: ``Soy
yo, no tengáis miedo''. \bibleverse{21} Por lo tanto, estaban dispuestos
a recibirlo en la barca. Inmediatamente la barca llegó a la tierra a la
que se dirigían.

\hypertarget{el-reencuentro-con-el-pueblo-y-la-demanda-de-seuxf1al-del-pueblo}{%
\subsection{El reencuentro con el pueblo y la demanda de señal del
pueblo}\label{el-reencuentro-con-el-pueblo-y-la-demanda-de-seuxf1al-del-pueblo}}

\bibleverse{22} Al día siguiente, la multitud que estaba al otro lado
del mar vio que no había allí ninguna otra barca, sino aquella en la que
se habían embarcado sus discípulos, y que Jesús no había entrado con sus
discípulos en la barca, sino que sus discípulos se habían ido solos.
\bibleverse{23} Sin embargo, unas barcas procedentes de Tiberíades se
acercaron al lugar donde comieron el pan después de que el Señor diera
las gracias. \bibleverse{24} Al ver, pues, la multitud que Jesús no
estaba allí, ni sus discípulos, subieron ellos mismos a las barcas y
vinieron a Capernaum, buscando a Jesús. \bibleverse{25} Cuando lo
encontraron al otro lado del mar, le preguntaron: ``Rabí, ¿cuándo has
venido aquí?''

\bibleverse{26} Jesús les respondió: ``Os aseguro que me buscáis, no
porque hayáis visto señales, sino porque habéis comido de los panes y os
habéis saciado. \bibleverse{27} No trabajéis por el alimento que perece,
sino por el que permanece para la vida eterna, que os dará el Hijo del
Hombre. Porque Dios Padre lo ha sellado''. \footnote{\textbf{6:27} Juan
  5,36}

\bibleverse{28} Entonces le dijeron: ``¿Qué debemos hacer, para que
podamos obrar las obras de Dios?''

\bibleverse{29} Jesús les respondió: ``Esta es la obra de Dios, que
creáis en el que él ha enviado''.

\bibleverse{30} Por eso le dijeron: ``¿Qué señal haces, pues, para que
te veamos y te creamos? ¿Qué obra haces? \bibleverse{31} Nuestros padres
comieron el maná en el desierto. Como está escrito: `Les dio a comer pan
del cielo'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{6:31} Éxod 16,13-14}

\hypertarget{el-discurso-de-jesuxfas-sobre-el-pan-de-vida}{%
\subsection{El discurso de Jesús sobre el pan de
vida}\label{el-discurso-de-jesuxfas-sobre-el-pan-de-vida}}

\bibleverse{32} Entonces Jesús les dijo: ``Os aseguro que no fue Moisés
quien os dio el pan del cielo, sino que mi Padre os da el verdadero pan
del cielo. \bibleverse{33} Porque el pan de Dios es el que baja del
cielo y da vida al mundo.''

\bibleverse{34} Por eso le dijeron: ``Señor, danos siempre este pan''.

\bibleverse{35} Jesús les dijo: ``Yo soy el pan de vida. El que viene a
mí no tendrá hambre, y el que cree en mí nunca tendrá sed. \footnote{\textbf{6:35}
  Juan 4,14; Juan 7,37} \bibleverse{36} Pero os he dicho que me habéis
visto, y sin embargo no creéis. \bibleverse{37} Todos los que el Padre
me dé vendrán a mí. Al que venga a mí no lo echaré de ninguna manera.
\footnote{\textbf{6:37} Mat 11,28} \bibleverse{38} Porque he bajado del
cielo, no para hacer mi propia voluntad, sino la voluntad del que me ha
enviado. \footnote{\textbf{6:38} Juan 4,34} \bibleverse{39} Esta es la
voluntad de mi Padre que me ha enviado: que de todo lo que me ha dado no
pierda nada, sino que lo resucite en el último día. \footnote{\textbf{6:39}
  Juan 10,28-29; Juan 17,12} \bibleverse{40} Esta es la voluntad del que
me ha enviado: que todo el que vea al Hijo y crea en él tenga vida
eterna; y yo lo resucitaré en el último día.'' \footnote{\textbf{6:40}
  Juan 5,29; Juan 11,24}

\bibleverse{41} Los judíos, pues, murmuraban de él, porque decía: ``Yo
soy el pan bajado del cielo''. \bibleverse{42} Dijeron: ``¿No es éste
Jesús, el hijo de José, cuyo padre y madre conocemos? ¿Cómo, pues, dice:
``He bajado del cielo''?'' \footnote{\textbf{6:42} Luc 4,22}

\bibleverse{43} Por eso Jesús les respondió: ``No murmuren entre
ustedes. \bibleverse{44} Nadie puede venir a mí si el Padre que me envió
no lo atrae; y yo lo resucitaré en el último día. \bibleverse{45} Está
escrito en los profetas: `Todos serán enseñados por Dios'. Por eso, todo
el que oye del Padre y ha aprendido, viene a mí. \bibleverse{46} No es
que alguien haya visto al Padre, sino el que viene de Dios. Él ha visto
al Padre. \footnote{\textbf{6:46} Juan 1,18} \bibleverse{47} De cierto
os digo que el que cree en mí tiene vida eterna. \footnote{\textbf{6:47}
  Juan 3,16} \bibleverse{48} Yo soy el pan de vida. \footnote{\textbf{6:48}
  Juan 6,35} \bibleverse{49} Vuestros padres comieron el maná en el
desierto y murieron. \footnote{\textbf{6:49} 1Cor 10,3-5}
\bibleverse{50} Este es el pan que baja del cielo, para que cualquiera
coma de él y no muera. \bibleverse{51} Yo soy el pan vivo que ha bajado
del cielo. Si alguien come de este pan, vivirá para siempre. Sí, el pan
que daré para la vida del mundo es mi carne''.

\bibleverse{52} Los judíos, pues, discutían entre sí, diciendo: ``¿Cómo
puede éste darnos a comer su carne?''

\bibleverse{53} Por eso Jesús les dijo: ``Os aseguro que si no coméis la
carne del Hijo del Hombre y no bebéis su sangre, no tenéis vida en
vosotros mismos. \bibleverse{54} El que come mi carne y bebe mi sangre
tiene vida eterna, y yo lo resucitaré en el último día. \footnote{\textbf{6:54}
  Mat 26,26-28} \bibleverse{55} Porque mi carne es verdadera comida y mi
sangre es verdadera bebida. \bibleverse{56} El que come mi carne y bebe
mi sangre vive en mí, y yo en él. \footnote{\textbf{6:56} Juan 15,4; 1Jn
  3,24} \bibleverse{57} Como el Padre viviente me envió, y yo vivo por
el Padre, así el que se alimenta de mí también vivirá por mí.
\bibleverse{58} Este es el pan que bajó del cielo, no como nuestros
padres que comieron el maná y murieron. El que come este pan vivirá para
siempre''. \bibleverse{59} Estas cosas las decía en la sinagoga,
mientras enseñaba en Capernaum.

\hypertarget{el-divorcio-de-los-discuxedpulos-de-jesuxfas-como-efecto-del-habla}{%
\subsection{El divorcio de los discípulos de Jesús como efecto del
habla}\label{el-divorcio-de-los-discuxedpulos-de-jesuxfas-como-efecto-del-habla}}

\bibleverse{60} Por eso, muchos de sus discípulos, al oír esto, dijeron:
``¡Qué dura es esta frase! ¿Quién puede escucharlo?''

\bibleverse{61} Pero Jesús, sabiendo en sí mismo que sus discípulos
murmuraban de esto, les dijo: ``¿Esto os hace tropezar? \bibleverse{62}
¿Y si vierais al Hijo del Hombre subir adonde estaba antes? \footnote{\textbf{6:62}
  Luc 24,50-51} \bibleverse{63} El espíritu es el que da la vida. La
carne no aprovecha nada. Las palabras que yo os digo son espíritu y son
vida. \footnote{\textbf{6:63} 2Cor 3,6} \bibleverse{64} Pero hay algunos
de vosotros que no creen''. Porque Jesús sabía desde el principio
quiénes eran los que no creían, y quiénes eran los que lo iban a
traicionar. \bibleverse{65} Dijo: ``Por eso os he dicho que nadie puede
venir a mí, si no le es dado por mi Padre.''

\bibleverse{66} Al oír esto, muchos de sus discípulos volvieron atrás y
ya no andaban con él. \bibleverse{67} Entonces Jesús dijo a los doce:
``¿No queréis iros también vosotros, verdad?''

\bibleverse{68} Simón Pedro le respondió: ``Señor, ¿a quién vamos a ir?
Tú tienes palabras de vida eterna. \bibleverse{69} Hemos llegado a creer
y conocer que tú eres el Cristo, el Hijo de Dios vivo''. \footnote{\textbf{6:69}
  Mat 16,16}

\bibleverse{70} Jesús les respondió: ``¿No os he elegido a vosotros, los
doce, y uno de vosotros es un demonio?'' \bibleverse{71} Ahora bien,
hablaba de Judas, hijo de Simón Iscariote, porque era él quien lo iba a
traicionar, siendo uno de los doce.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, Jesus went away to the other side of
the sea of Galilee, which is also called the Sea of Tiberias.
\bibleverse{2} A great multitude followed him, because they saw his
signs which he did on those who were sick. \bibleverse{3} Jesus went up
into the mountain, and he sat there with his disciples. \bibleverse{4}
Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. \bibleverse{5}
Jesus therefore, lifting up his eyes and seeing that a great multitude
was coming to him, said to Philip, ``Where are we to buy bread, that
these may eat?'' \bibleverse{6} He said this to test him, for he himself
knew what he would do.

\bibleverse{7} Philip answered him, ``Two hundred denarii\footnote{\textbf{6:7}
  A denarius was a silver coin worth about a day's wages for an
  agricultural laborer, so 200 denarii would be between 6 and 7 month's
  pay.} worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of
them may receive a little.''

\bibleverse{8} One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said
to him, \bibleverse{9} ``There is a boy here who has five barley loaves
and two fish, but what are these among so many?''

\bibleverse{10} Jesus said, ``Have the people sit down.'' Now there was
much grass in that place. So the men sat down, in number about five
thousand. \bibleverse{11} Jesus took the loaves, and having given
thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who
were sitting down, likewise also of the fish as much as they desired.
\bibleverse{12} When they were filled, he said to his disciples,
``Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, that nothing be
lost.'' \bibleverse{13} So they gathered them up, and filled twelve
baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which were left
over by those who had eaten. \bibleverse{14} When therefore the people
saw the sign which Jesus did, they said, ``This is truly the prophet who
comes into the world.'' \bibleverse{15} Jesus therefore, perceiving that
they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, withdrew
again to the mountain by himself.

\bibleverse{16} When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea.
\bibleverse{17} They entered into the boat, and were going over the sea
to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them.
\bibleverse{18} The sea was tossed by a great wind blowing.
\bibleverse{19} When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or
thirty stadia,\footnote{\textbf{6:19} 25 to 30 stadia is about 5 to 6
  kilometers or about 3 to 4 miles} they saw Jesus walking on the
sea\footnote{\textbf{6:19} See Job 9:8} and drawing near to the boat;
and they were afraid. \bibleverse{20} But he said to them, ``It is
I.\footnote{\textbf{6:20} or, I AM} Don't be afraid.'' \bibleverse{21}
They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat. Immediately
the boat was at the land where they were going.

\bibleverse{22} On the next day, the multitude that stood on the other
side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there, except the one
in which his disciples had embarked, and that Jesus hadn't entered with
his disciples into the boat, but his disciples had gone away alone.
\bibleverse{23} However, boats from Tiberias came near to the place
where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
\bibleverse{24} When the multitude therefore saw that Jesus wasn't
there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and came to
Capernaum, seeking Jesus. \bibleverse{25} When they found him on the
other side of the sea, they asked him, ``Rabbi, when did you come
here?''

\bibleverse{26} Jesus answered them, ``Most certainly I tell you, you
seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves
and were filled. \bibleverse{27} Don't work for the food which perishes,
but for the food which remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man
will give to you. For God the Father has sealed him.''

\bibleverse{28} They said therefore to him, ``What must we do, that we
may work the works of God?''

\bibleverse{29} Jesus answered them, ``This is the work of God, that you
believe in him whom he has sent.''

\bibleverse{30} They said therefore to him, ``What then do you do for a
sign, that we may see and believe you? What work do you do?
\bibleverse{31} Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness. As it is
written, `He gave them bread out of heaven\footnote{\textbf{6:31} Greek
  and Hebrew use the same word for ``heaven'', ``the heavens'', ``the
  sky'', and ``the air''.} to eat.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{6:31} Exodus
  16:4; Nehemiah 9:15; Psalm 78:24-25}

\bibleverse{32} Jesus therefore said to them, ``Most certainly, I tell
you, it wasn't Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven, but my Father
gives you the true bread out of heaven. \bibleverse{33} For the bread of
God is that which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the
world.''

\bibleverse{34} They said therefore to him, ``Lord, always give us this
bread.''

\bibleverse{35} Jesus said to them, ``I am the bread of life. Whoever
comes to me will not be hungry, and whoever believes in me will never be
thirsty. \bibleverse{36} But I told you that you have seen me, and yet
you don't believe. \bibleverse{37} All those whom the Father gives me
will come to me. He who comes to me I will in no way throw out.
\bibleverse{38} For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will,
but the will of him who sent me. \bibleverse{39} This is the will of my
Father who sent me, that of all he has given to me I should lose
nothing, but should raise him up at the last day. \bibleverse{40} This
is the will of the one who sent me, that everyone who sees the Son and
believes in him should have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the
last day.''

\bibleverse{41} The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he
said, ``I am the bread which came down out of heaven.'' \bibleverse{42}
They said, ``Isn't this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and
mother we know? How then does he say, `I have come down out of
heaven?'\,''

\bibleverse{43} Therefore Jesus answered them, ``Don't murmur among
yourselves. \bibleverse{44} No one can come to me unless the Father who
sent me draws him; and I will raise him up in the last day.
\bibleverse{45} It is written in the prophets, `They will all be taught
by God.' \footnote{\textbf{6:45} Isaiah 54:13} Therefore everyone who
hears from the Father and has learned, comes to me. \bibleverse{46} Not
that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God. He has seen
the Father. \bibleverse{47} Most certainly, I tell you, he who believes
in me has eternal life. \bibleverse{48} I am the bread of life.
\bibleverse{49} Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and they
died. \bibleverse{50} This is the bread which comes down out of heaven,
that anyone may eat of it and not die. \bibleverse{51} I am the living
bread which came down out of heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he
will live forever. Yes, the bread which I will give for the life of the
world is my flesh.''

\bibleverse{52} The Jews therefore contended with one another, saying,
``How can this man give us his flesh to eat?''

\bibleverse{53} Jesus therefore said to them, ``Most certainly I tell
you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you
don't have life in yourselves. \bibleverse{54} He who eats my flesh and
drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day. \bibleverse{55} For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed. \bibleverse{56} He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood lives
in me, and I in him. \bibleverse{57} As the living Father sent me, and I
live because of the Father, so he who feeds on me will also live because
of me. \bibleverse{58} This is the bread which came down out of
heaven---not as our fathers ate the manna and died. He who eats this
bread will live forever.'' \bibleverse{59} He said these things in the
synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.

\bibleverse{60} Therefore many of his disciples, when they heard this,
said, ``This is a hard saying! Who can listen to it?''

\bibleverse{61} But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured
at this, said to them, ``Does this cause you to stumble? \bibleverse{62}
Then what if you would see the Son of Man ascending to where he was
before? \bibleverse{63} It is the spirit who gives life. The flesh
profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and are life.
\bibleverse{64} But there are some of you who don't believe.'' For Jesus
knew from the beginning who they were who didn't believe, and who it was
who would betray him. \bibleverse{65} He said, ``For this cause I have
said to you that no one can come to me, unless it is given to him by my
Father.''

\bibleverse{66} At this, many of his disciples went back and walked no
more with him. \bibleverse{67} Jesus said therefore to the twelve, ``You
don't also want to go away, do you?''

\bibleverse{68} Simon Peter answered him, ``Lord, to whom would we go?
You have the words of eternal life. \bibleverse{69} We have come to
believe and know that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God.''

\bibleverse{70} Jesus answered them, ``Didn't I choose you, the twelve,
and one of you is a devil?'' \bibleverse{71} Now he spoke of Judas, the
son of Simon Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, being one of
the twelve.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-viaja-a-jerusaluxe9n-para-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos}{%
\subsection{Jesús viaja a Jerusalén para la Fiesta de los
Tabernáculos}\label{jesuxfas-viaja-a-jerusaluxe9n-para-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Después de estas cosas, Jesús andaba por Galilea, pues no
quería andar por Judea, porque los judíos buscaban matarlo. \footnote{\textbf{7:1}
  Juan 4,43} \bibleverse{2} Se acercaba la fiesta de los judíos, la
Fiesta de los Tabernáculos. \footnote{\textbf{7:2} Lev 23,34-36}
\bibleverse{3} Entonces sus hermanos le dijeron: ``Sal de aquí y vete a
Judea, para que también tus discípulos vean las obras que haces.
\footnote{\textbf{7:3} Juan 2,12; Mat 12,46; Hech 1,14} \bibleverse{4}
Porque nadie hace nada en secreto mientras busca ser conocido
abiertamente. Si haces estas cosas, date a conocer al mundo''.
\bibleverse{5} Porque ni siquiera sus hermanos creían en él.

\bibleverse{6} Por eso, Jesús les dijo: ``Todavía no ha llegado mi hora,
pero vuestra hora está siempre lista. \footnote{\textbf{7:6} Juan 2,4}
\bibleverse{7} El mundo no puede odiaros, pero me odia a mí, porque yo
doy testimonio de él, de que sus obras son malas. \footnote{\textbf{7:7}
  Juan 15,18} \bibleverse{8} Vosotros subid a la fiesta. Yo todavía no
subo a esta fiesta, porque mi tiempo aún no se ha cumplido.''

\bibleverse{9} Habiéndoles dicho estas cosas, se quedó en Galilea.
\bibleverse{10} Pero cuando sus hermanos subieron a la fiesta, él
también subió, no en público, sino como en secreto. \footnote{\textbf{7:10}
  Juan 2,13} \bibleverse{11} Los judíos, pues, le buscaban en la fiesta
y decían: ``¿Dónde está?''. \bibleverse{12} Había mucha murmuración
entre las multitudes acerca de él. Algunos decían: ``Es un buen
hombre''. Otros decían: ``No es así, sino que extravía a la multitud''.
\bibleverse{13} Pero nadie hablaba abiertamente de él por miedo a los
judíos. \footnote{\textbf{7:13} Juan 9,22; Juan 12,42; Juan 19,38}

\hypertarget{la-apariciuxf3n-y-el-testimonio-de-suxed-mismo-de-jesuxfas-en-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos}{%
\subsection{La aparición y el testimonio de sí mismo de Jesús en la
Fiesta de los
Tabernáculos}\label{la-apariciuxf3n-y-el-testimonio-de-suxed-mismo-de-jesuxfas-en-la-fiesta-de-los-tabernuxe1culos}}

\bibleverse{14} Pero cuando ya era la mitad de la fiesta, Jesús subió al
templo y enseñó. \bibleverse{15} Entonces los judíos se maravillaron,
diciendo: ``¿Cómo sabe éste las letras, no habiendo sido educado?''
\footnote{\textbf{7:15} Mat 13,56}

\bibleverse{16} Por eso Jesús les respondió: ``Mi enseñanza no es mía,
sino de quien me ha enviado. \bibleverse{17} Si alguien quiere hacer su
voluntad, conocerá la enseñanza, si viene de Dios o si hablo por mi
cuenta. \bibleverse{18} El que habla por su cuenta busca su propia
gloria, pero el que busca la gloria del que lo envió es veraz, y no hay
en él ninguna injusticia. \footnote{\textbf{7:18} Juan 5,41; Juan 5,44}
\bibleverse{19} ¿No os dio Moisés la ley, y sin embargo ninguno de
vosotros la cumple? ¿Por qué buscáis matarme?'' \footnote{\textbf{7:19}
  Juan 5,16; Juan 5,18; Rom 2,17-24}

\bibleverse{20} La multitud respondió: ``¡Tienes un demonio! ¿Quién
busca matarte?'' \footnote{\textbf{7:20} Juan 10,20}

\bibleverse{21} Jesús les respondió: ``Yo hice una obra y todos ustedes
se maravillan por ella. \footnote{\textbf{7:21} Juan 5,16}
\bibleverse{22} Moisés os ha dado la circuncisión (no es de Moisés, sino
de los padres), y en sábado circuncidáis a un muchacho. \footnote{\textbf{7:22}
  Gén 17,10-12; Lev 12,3} \bibleverse{23} Si un muchacho recibe la
circuncisión en sábado, para que no se infrinja la ley de Moisés, ¿os
enfadáis conmigo porque he hecho a un hombre completamente sano en
sábado? \bibleverse{24} No juzguéis según las apariencias, sino juzgad
con rectitud.''

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-viene-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Jesús viene de Dios}\label{jesuxfas-viene-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{25} Por eso algunos de los de Jerusalén dijeron: ``¿No es
éste al que quieren matar? \bibleverse{26} He aquí que habla
abiertamente, y no le dicen nada. ¿Es posible que los gobernantes sepan
que éste es verdaderamente el Cristo? \bibleverse{27} Sin embargo,
nosotros sabemos de dónde viene este hombre, pero cuando venga el
Cristo, nadie sabrá de dónde viene.'' \footnote{\textbf{7:27} Heb 7,3}

\bibleverse{28} Por eso Jesús alzó la voz en el templo, enseñando y
diciendo: ``Vosotros me conocéis y sabéis de dónde vengo. No he venido
por mí mismo, sino que es verdadero el que me ha enviado, a quien
vosotros no conocéis. \bibleverse{29} Yo lo conozco, porque vengo de él,
y él me ha enviado''. \footnote{\textbf{7:29} Mat 11,27}

\bibleverse{30} Buscaban, pues, prenderle; pero nadie le echó mano,
porque aún no había llegado su hora. \footnote{\textbf{7:30} Juan 8,20;
  Luc 22,53} \bibleverse{31} Pero de la multitud, muchos creyeron en él.
Decían: ``Cuando venga el Cristo, no hará más señales que las que ha
hecho este hombre, ¿verdad?'' \bibleverse{32} Los fariseos oyeron que la
multitud murmuraba estas cosas acerca de él, y los jefes de los
sacerdotes y los fariseos enviaron oficiales para arrestarlo.

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-anuncia-su-regressa-a-dios}{%
\subsection{Jesús anuncia su regressa a
Dios}\label{jesuxfas-anuncia-su-regressa-a-dios}}

\bibleverse{33} Entonces Jesús dijo: ``Estaré con vosotros un poco más,
y luego me iré con el que me ha enviado. \footnote{\textbf{7:33} Juan
  13,33} \bibleverse{34} Me buscaréis y no me encontraréis. No podéis
venir donde yo estoy''. \footnote{\textbf{7:34} Juan 8,21}

\bibleverse{35} Los judíos, pues, decían entre sí: ``¿Adónde irá este
hombre para que no lo encontremos? ¿Irá a la Dispersión entre los
griegos y enseñará a los griegos? \bibleverse{36} ¿Qué es esto que ha
dicho: ``Me buscaréis y no me encontraréis'', y ``Donde yo esté,
vosotros no podréis venir''?''

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-en-el-apogeo-de-la-fiesta-como-dador-del-agua-de-vida}{%
\subsection{Jesús en el apogeo de la fiesta como dador del agua de
vida}\label{jesuxfas-en-el-apogeo-de-la-fiesta-como-dador-del-agua-de-vida}}

\bibleverse{37} El último y más importante día de la fiesta, Jesús se
puso en pie y alzó la voz: ``Si alguien tiene sed, que venga a mí y
beba. \footnote{\textbf{7:37} Lev 23,36; Juan 4,10; Is 55,1; Apoc 22,17}
\bibleverse{38} El que cree en mí, como dice la Escritura, de su
interior brotarán ríos de agua viva.'' \footnote{\textbf{7:38} Is 58,11}
\bibleverse{39} Pero esto lo dijo a propósito del Espíritu, que iban a
recibir los que creyeran en él. Porque el Espíritu Santo no se había
dado aún, porque Jesús no estaba todavía glorificado. \footnote{\textbf{7:39}
  Juan 16,7}

\bibleverse{40} Por lo tanto, muchos de la multitud, al oír estas
palabras, dijeron: ``Este es verdaderamente el profeta''. \footnote{\textbf{7:40}
  Juan 6,14} \bibleverse{41} Otros decían: ``Este es el Cristo''. Pero
algunos decían: ``¿Qué, el Cristo sale de Galilea? \footnote{\textbf{7:41}
  Juan 1,46} \bibleverse{42} ¿No ha dicho la Escritura que el Cristo
viene de la estirpe de David y de Belén, la aldea donde estuvo David?''
\footnote{\textbf{7:42} Miq 5,2; Mat 2,5-6; Mat 22,42} \bibleverse{43}
Así que surgió una división en la multitud a causa de él. \footnote{\textbf{7:43}
  Juan 9,16} \bibleverse{44} Algunos querían prenderle, pero nadie le
echó mano.

\hypertarget{fracaso-del-plan-de-arresto-de-los-luxedderes-divisiuxf3n-entre-los-miembros-del-sumo-consejo-amonestaciuxf3n-de-nicodemo}{%
\subsection{Fracaso del plan de arresto de los líderes; División entre
los miembros del sumo consejo; Amonestación de
Nicodemo}\label{fracaso-del-plan-de-arresto-de-los-luxedderes-divisiuxf3n-entre-los-miembros-del-sumo-consejo-amonestaciuxf3n-de-nicodemo}}

\bibleverse{45} Los oficiales, pues, acudieron a los sumos sacerdotes y
a los fariseos, y les dijeron: ``¿Por qué no le habéis traído?''

\bibleverse{46} Los oficiales respondieron: ``¡Nunca nadie habló como
este hombre!'' \footnote{\textbf{7:46} Mat 7,28-29}

\bibleverse{47} Los fariseos, por tanto, les respondieron: ``¿No
estaréis también vosotros engañados, verdad? \bibleverse{48} ¿Acaso ha
creído en él alguno de los gobernantes o alguno de los fariseos?
\bibleverse{49} Pero esta multitud que no conoce la ley es maldita''.

\bibleverse{50} Nicodemo (el que vino a él de noche, siendo uno de
ellos) les dijo: \footnote{\textbf{7:50} Juan 3,1-2} \bibleverse{51}
``¿Acaso nuestra ley juzga a un hombre si antes no lo oye personalmente
y sabe lo que hace?'' \footnote{\textbf{7:51} Deut 1,16-17}

\bibleverse{52} Le respondieron: ``¿Tú también eres de Galilea? Busca y
ve que no ha surgido ningún profeta de Galilea''.

\bibleverse{53} Cada uno se fue a su casa,

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, Jesus was walking in Galilee, for he
wouldn't walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.
\bibleverse{2} Now the feast of the Jews, the Feast of Booths, was at
hand. \bibleverse{3} His brothers therefore said to him, ``Depart from
here and go into Judea, that your disciples also may see your works
which you do. \bibleverse{4} For no one does anything in secret while he
seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, reveal yourself to the
world.'' \bibleverse{5} For even his brothers didn't believe in him.

\bibleverse{6} Jesus therefore said to them, ``My time has not yet come,
but your time is always ready. \bibleverse{7} The world can't hate you,
but it hates me, because I testify about it, that its works are evil.
\bibleverse{8} You go up to the feast. I am not yet going up to this
feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.''

\bibleverse{9} Having said these things to them, he stayed in Galilee.
\bibleverse{10} But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he
also went up, not publicly, but as it were in secret. \bibleverse{11}
The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, ``Where is he?''
\bibleverse{12} There was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning
him. Some said, ``He is a good man.'' Others said, ``Not so, but he
leads the multitude astray.'' \bibleverse{13} Yet no one spoke openly of
him for fear of the Jews. \bibleverse{14} But when it was now the middle
of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught. \bibleverse{15}
The Jews therefore marveled, saying, ``How does this man know letters,
having never been educated?''

\bibleverse{16} Jesus therefore answered them, ``My teaching is not
mine, but his who sent me. \bibleverse{17} If anyone desires to do his
will, he will know about the teaching, whether it is from God or if I am
speaking from myself. \bibleverse{18} He who speaks from himself seeks
his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true,
and no unrighteousness is in him. \bibleverse{19} Didn't Moses give you
the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why do you seek to kill
me?''

\bibleverse{20} The multitude answered, ``You have a demon! Who seeks to
kill you?''

\bibleverse{21} Jesus answered them, ``I did one work and you all marvel
because of it. \bibleverse{22} Moses has given you circumcision (not
that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath you
circumcise a boy. \bibleverse{23} If a boy receives circumcision on the
Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me
because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath? \bibleverse{24}
Don't judge according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.''

\bibleverse{25} Therefore some of them of Jerusalem said, ``Isn't this
he whom they seek to kill? \bibleverse{26} Behold, he speaks openly, and
they say nothing to him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this
is truly the Christ? \bibleverse{27} However, we know where this man
comes from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes
from.''

\bibleverse{28} Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and
saying, ``You both know me, and know where I am from. I have not come of
myself, but he who sent me is true, whom you don't know. \bibleverse{29}
I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.''

\bibleverse{30} They sought therefore to take him; but no one laid a
hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. \bibleverse{31} But of
the multitude, many believed in him. They said, ``When the Christ comes,
he won't do more signs than those which this man has done, will he?''
\bibleverse{32} The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things
concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to
arrest him.

\bibleverse{33} Then Jesus said, ``I will be with you a little while
longer, then I go to him who sent me. \bibleverse{34} You will seek me
and won't find me. You can't come where I am.''

\bibleverse{35} The Jews therefore said among themselves, ``Where will
this man go that we won't find him? Will he go to the Dispersion among
the Greeks and teach the Greeks? \bibleverse{36} What is this word that
he said, `You will seek me, and won't find me;' and `Where I am, you
can't come'?''

\bibleverse{37} Now on the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus
stood and cried out, ``If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and
drink! \bibleverse{38} He who believes in me, as the Scripture has said,
from within him will flow rivers of living water.'' \bibleverse{39} But
he said this about the Spirit, which those believing in him were to
receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus wasn't yet
glorified.

\bibleverse{40} Many of the multitude therefore, when they heard these
words, said, ``This is truly the prophet.'' \bibleverse{41} Others said,
``This is the Christ.'' But some said, ``What, does the Christ come out
of Galilee? \bibleverse{42} Hasn't the Scripture said that the Christ
comes of the offspring\footnote{\textbf{7:42} or, seed} of David,
\footnote{\textbf{7:42} 2 Samuel 7:12} and from Bethlehem,\footnote{\textbf{7:42}
  Micah 5:2} the village where David was?'' \bibleverse{43} So a
division arose in the multitude because of him. \bibleverse{44} Some of
them would have arrested him, but no one laid hands on him.
\bibleverse{45} The officers therefore came to the chief priests and
Pharisees; and they said to them, ``Why didn't you bring him?''

\bibleverse{46} The officers answered, ``No man ever spoke like this
man!''

\bibleverse{47} The Pharisees therefore answered them, ``You aren't also
led astray, are you? \bibleverse{48} Have any of the rulers or any of
the Pharisees believed in him? \bibleverse{49} But this multitude that
doesn't know the law is cursed.''

\bibleverse{50} Nicodemus (he who came to him by night, being one of
them) said to them, \bibleverse{51} ``Does our law judge a man unless it
first hears from him personally and knows what he does?''

\bibleverse{52} They answered him, ``Are you also from Galilee? Search
and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee.''\footnote{\textbf{7:52}
  See Isaiah 9:1; Matthew 4:13-16}

\bibleverse{53} Everyone went to his own house,

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-y-la-aduxfaltera}{%
\subsection{Jesús y la adúltera}\label{jesuxfas-y-la-aduxfaltera}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} pero Jesús fue al Monte de los Olivos.

\bibleverse{2} Por la mañana, muy temprano, entró de nuevo en el templo,
y toda la gente acudió a él. Se sentó y les enseñó. \bibleverse{3} Los
escribas y los fariseos trajeron a una mujer sorprendida por el
adulterio. Tras ponerla en medio, \bibleverse{4} le dijeron: ``Maestro,
hemos encontrado a esta mujer en adulterio, en el acto mismo.
\bibleverse{5} Ahora bien, en nuestra ley, Moisés nos ordenó apedrear a
tales mujeres. ¿Qué dices, pues, de ella?'' \footnote{\textbf{8:5} Lev
  20,10} \bibleverse{6} Dijeron esto poniéndole a prueba, para tener de
qué acusarle. Pero Jesús se inclinó y escribió en el suelo con el dedo.
\bibleverse{7} Pero como le seguían preguntando, levantó la vista y les
dijo: ``El que esté libre de pecado entre vosotros, que tire la primera
piedra contra ella.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:7} Rom 2,1} \bibleverse{8} De
nuevo se agachó y escribió en el suelo con el dedo.

\bibleverse{9} Ellos, al oírlo, condenados por su conciencia, salieron
uno por uno, empezando por el más viejo hasta el último. Jesús se quedó
solo con la mujer donde estaba, en medio. \bibleverse{10} Jesús,
levantándose, la vio y le dijo: ``Mujer, ¿dónde están tus acusadores?
¿Nadie te ha condenado?''

\bibleverse{11} Ella dijo: ``Nadie, Señor''. Jesús dijo: ``Tampoco yo te
condeno. Sigue tu camino. Desde ahora, no peques más.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:11}
  Juan 5,14}

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-suxed-mismo-de-jesuxfas-como-la-luz-del-mundo-y-el-hijo-de-dios}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de sí mismo de Jesús como la luz del mundo y
el Hijo de
Dios}\label{el-testimonio-de-suxed-mismo-de-jesuxfas-como-la-luz-del-mundo-y-el-hijo-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{12} Por eso, Jesús les habló de nuevo, diciendo: ``Yo soy la
luz del mundo. El que me sigue no caminará en la oscuridad, sino que
tendrá la luz de la vida''. \footnote{\textbf{8:12} Is 49,6; Juan 1,5;
  Juan 1,9; Mat 5,14-16}

\bibleverse{13} Los fariseos, por tanto, le dijeron: ``Das testimonio de
ti mismo. Tu testimonio no es válido''.

\bibleverse{14} Jesús les respondió: ``Aunque yo dé testimonio de mí
mismo, mi testimonio es verdadero, porque sé de dónde vengo y a dónde
voy; pero ustedes no saben de dónde vengo ni a dónde voy. \footnote{\textbf{8:14}
  Juan 5,31; Juan 7,28} \bibleverse{15} Ustedes juzgan según la carne.
Yo no juzgo a nadie. \footnote{\textbf{8:15} Juan 3,17} \bibleverse{16}
Aunque juzgue, mi juicio es verdadero, porque no estoy solo, sino que
estoy con el Padre que me envió. \bibleverse{17} También está escrito en
tu ley que el testimonio de dos personas es válido. \footnote{\textbf{8:17}
  Deut 19,15} \bibleverse{18} Yo soy uno que da testimonio de mí mismo,
y el Padre que me envió da testimonio de mí''.

\bibleverse{19} Por eso le dijeron: ``¿Dónde está tu Padre?''. Jesús
respondió: ``No me conocéis ni a mí ni a mi Padre. Si me conocieran,
conocerían también a mi Padre''. \footnote{\textbf{8:19} Juan 14,7}
\bibleverse{20} Jesús dijo estas palabras en el tesoro, mientras
enseñaba en el templo. Pero nadie lo arrestó, porque aún no había
llegado su hora. \footnote{\textbf{8:20} Juan 7,30}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-da-testimonio-del-profundo-abismo-que-lo-separa-de-los-juduxedos-seguxfan-sus-oruxedgenes}{%
\subsection{Jesús da testimonio del profundo abismo que lo separa de los
judíos según sus
orígenes}\label{jesuxfas-da-testimonio-del-profundo-abismo-que-lo-separa-de-los-juduxedos-seguxfan-sus-oruxedgenes}}

\bibleverse{21} Por eso, Jesús les dijo de nuevo: ``Me voy, y me
buscaréis, y moriréis en vuestros pecados. Donde yo voy, vosotros no
podéis venir''. \footnote{\textbf{8:21} Juan 7,34-35; Juan 13,33}

\bibleverse{22} Los judíos, por tanto, dijeron: ``¿Se va a matar, porque
dice: ``A donde yo voy, tú no puedes venir''?''

\bibleverse{23} Les dijo: ``Vosotros sois de abajo. Yo soy de arriba.
Vosotros sois de este mundo. Yo no soy de este mundo. \footnote{\textbf{8:23}
  Juan 3,31} \bibleverse{24} Por eso os he dicho que moriréis en
vuestros pecados; porque si no creéis que yo soy, moriréis en vuestros
pecados.''

\bibleverse{25} Le dijeron, pues, ``¿Quién eres tú?''. Jesús les dijo:
``Justo lo que os he estado diciendo desde el principio. \bibleverse{26}
Tengo muchas cosas que decir y juzgar sobre vosotros. Sin embargo, el
que me ha enviado es veraz; y lo que he oído de él, eso digo al mundo.''

\bibleverse{27} No entendían que les hablaba del Padre. \bibleverse{28}
Por eso Jesús les dijo: ``Cuando hayáis levantado al Hijo del Hombre,
entonces sabréis que yo soy, y que no hago nada por mí mismo, sino que,
como me enseñó mi Padre, digo estas cosas. \footnote{\textbf{8:28} Juan
  3,14; Juan 12,32} \bibleverse{29} El que me ha enviado está conmigo.
El Padre no me ha dejado solo, porque siempre hago las cosas que le
agradan.''

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-de-su-filiaciuxf3n-de-dios-y-de-la-esclavitud-del-pecado-de-los-juduxedos-a-pesar-de-su-descendencia-de-abraham}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de Jesús de su filiación de Dios y de la
esclavitud del pecado de los judíos a pesar de su descendencia de
Abraham}\label{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-de-su-filiaciuxf3n-de-dios-y-de-la-esclavitud-del-pecado-de-los-juduxedos-a-pesar-de-su-descendencia-de-abraham}}

\bibleverse{30} Mientras decía estas cosas, muchos creían en él.
\bibleverse{31} Entonces Jesús dijo a los judíos que habían creído en
él: ``Si permanecéis en mi palabra, entonces sois verdaderamente mis
discípulos. \footnote{\textbf{8:31} Juan 15,7} \bibleverse{32}
Conoceréis la verdad, y la verdad os hará libres''.

\bibleverse{33} Ellos le respondieron: ``Somos descendientes de Abraham,
y nunca hemos sido esclavos de nadie. ¿Cómo dices que serás libre?''
\footnote{\textbf{8:33} Mat 3,9}

\bibleverse{34} Jesús les contestó: ``De cierto os digo que todo el que
comete pecado es siervo del pecado. \bibleverse{35} Un siervo no vive en
la casa para siempre. Un hijo permanece para siempre. \bibleverse{36}
Por eso, si el Hijo os hace libres, seréis verdaderamente libres.
\footnote{\textbf{8:36} Rom 6,16; Rom 6,18; Rom 6,22}

\hypertarget{los-juduxedos-incruxe9dulos-no-son-hijos-de-abraham-ni-de-dios-sino-hijos-del-diablo}{%
\subsection{Los judíos incrédulos no son hijos de Abraham ni de Dios,
sino hijos del
diablo}\label{los-juduxedos-incruxe9dulos-no-son-hijos-de-abraham-ni-de-dios-sino-hijos-del-diablo}}

\bibleverse{37} Yo sé que sois descendientes de Abraham, y sin embargo
buscáis matarme, porque mi palabra no encuentra lugar en vosotros.
\bibleverse{38} Yo digo lo que he visto con mi Padre; y vosotros también
hacéis lo que habéis visto con vuestro padre.''

\bibleverse{39} Ellos le respondieron: ``Nuestro padre es Abraham''.
Jesús les dijo: ``Si fuerais hijos de Abraham, haríais las obras de
Abraham. \bibleverse{40} Pero ahora buscáis matarme a mí, un hombre que
os ha dicho la verdad que he oído de Dios. Abraham no hizo esto.
\bibleverse{41} Vosotros hacéis las obras de vuestro padre''. Le
dijeron: ``No hemos nacido de la inmoralidad sexual. Tenemos un solo
Padre, Dios''.

\bibleverse{42} Por eso Jesús les dijo: ``Si Dios fuera vuestro padre,
me amaríais, porque he salido y vengo de Dios. Pues no he venido por mí
mismo, sino que él me ha enviado. \bibleverse{43} ¿Por qué no entendéis
mi discurso? Porque no puedes escuchar mi palabra. \footnote{\textbf{8:43}
  1Cor 2,14} \bibleverse{44} Vosotros sois de vuestro padre el diablo, y
queréis hacer los deseos de vuestro padre. Él es un asesino desde el
principio, y no se mantiene en la verdad, porque no hay verdad en él.
Cuando habla una mentira, habla por su cuenta; porque es un mentiroso y
el padre de la mentira. \footnote{\textbf{8:44} 1Jn 3,8-10; Gén 3,4; Gén
  3,19} \bibleverse{45} Pero porque digo la verdad, no me creéis.
\bibleverse{46} ¿Quién de vosotros me convence de pecado? Si digo la
verdad, ¿por qué no me creéis? \footnote{\textbf{8:46} 2Cor 5,21; 1Pe
  2,22; 1Jn 3,5; Heb 4,15} \bibleverse{47} El que es de Dios escucha las
palabras de Dios. Por eso no oís, porque no sois de Dios''. \footnote{\textbf{8:47}
  Juan 18,37}

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-de-la-majestad-de-suxed-mismo-y-de-su-superioridad-sobre-abraham}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de Jesús de la majestad de sí mismo y de su
superioridad sobre
Abraham}\label{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-de-la-majestad-de-suxed-mismo-y-de-su-superioridad-sobre-abraham}}

\bibleverse{48} Entonces los judíos le respondieron: ``¿No decimos bien
que eres samaritano y tienes un demonio?'' \footnote{\textbf{8:48} Juan
  7,20}

\bibleverse{49} Jesús respondió: ``Yo no tengo un demonio, pero honro a
mi Padre y ustedes me deshonran. \bibleverse{50} Pero yo no busco mi
propia gloria. Hay uno que busca y juzga. \bibleverse{51} Ciertamente,
les digo que si una persona cumple mi palabra, nunca verá la muerte''.
\footnote{\textbf{8:51} Juan 6,40; Juan 6,47}

\bibleverse{52} Entonces los judíos le dijeron: ``Ahora sabemos que
tienes un demonio. Abraham murió, así como los profetas; y tú dices: `Si
un hombre guarda mi palabra, no probará jamás la muerte'.
\bibleverse{53} ¿Eres tú mayor que nuestro padre Abraham, que murió? Los
profetas murieron. ¿Quién te crees que eres?''

\bibleverse{54} Jesús respondió: ``Si me glorifico a mí mismo, mi gloria
no es nada. Quien me glorifica es mi Padre, del que decís que es nuestro
Dios. \bibleverse{55} Ustedes no lo han conocido, pero yo sí lo conozco.
Si dijera: ``No lo conozco'', sería como vosotros, un mentiroso. Pero yo
lo conozco y cumplo su palabra. \footnote{\textbf{8:55} Juan 7,28-29}
\bibleverse{56} Vuestro padre Abraham se alegró al ver mi día. Lo vio y
se alegró''.

\bibleverse{57} Los judíos le dijeron: ``¡Todavía no tienes cincuenta
años! ¿Has visto a Abraham?''

\bibleverse{58} Jesús les dijo: ``Os aseguro que antes de que Abraham
llegara a existir, YO SOY.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:58} Juan 1,1-2}

\bibleverse{59} Por eso tomaron piedras para arrojárselas, pero Jesús se
escondió y salió del templo, pasando por en medio de ellos, y así pasó
de largo. \footnote{\textbf{8:59} Juan 10,31}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.

\bibleverse{2} Now very early in the morning, he came again into the
temple, and all the people came to him. He sat down and taught them.
\bibleverse{3} The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman taken in
adultery. Having set her in the middle, \bibleverse{4} they told him,
``Teacher, we found this woman in adultery, in the very act.
\bibleverse{5} Now in our law, Moses commanded us to stone such
women.\footnote{\textbf{8:5} Leviticus 20:10; Deuteronomy 22:22} What
then do you say about her?'' \bibleverse{6} They said this testing him,
that they might have something to accuse him of.

But Jesus stooped down and wrote on the ground with his finger.
\bibleverse{7} But when they continued asking him, he looked up and said
to them, ``He who is without sin among you, let him throw the first
stone at her.'' \bibleverse{8} Again he stooped down and wrote on the
ground with his finger.

\bibleverse{9} They, when they heard it, being convicted by their
conscience, went out one by one, beginning from the oldest, even to the
last. Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was, in the middle.
\bibleverse{10} Jesus, standing up, saw her and said, ``Woman, where are
your accusers? Did no one condemn you?''

\bibleverse{11} She said, ``No one, Lord.''

Jesus said, ``Neither do I condemn you. Go your way. From now on, sin no
more.''\footnote{\textbf{8:11} NU includes John 7:53--John 8:11, but
  puts brackets around it to indicate that the textual critics had less
  confidence that this was original.}

\bibleverse{12} Again, therefore, Jesus spoke to them, saying, ``I am
the light of the world.\footnote{\textbf{8:12} Isaiah 60:1} He who
follows me will not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of
life.''

\bibleverse{13} The Pharisees therefore said to him, ``You testify about
yourself. Your testimony is not valid.''

\bibleverse{14} Jesus answered them, ``Even if I testify about myself,
my testimony is true, for I know where I came from, and where I am
going; but you don't know where I came from, or where I am going.
\bibleverse{15} You judge according to the flesh. I judge no one.
\bibleverse{16} Even if I do judge, my judgment is true, for I am not
alone, but I am with the Father who sent me. \bibleverse{17} It's also
written in your law that the testimony of two people is
valid.\footnote{\textbf{8:17} Deuteronomy 17:6; 19:15} \bibleverse{18} I
am one who testifies about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies
about me.''

\bibleverse{19} They said therefore to him, ``Where is your Father?''

Jesus answered, ``You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you
would know my Father also.'' \bibleverse{20} Jesus spoke these words in
the treasury, as he taught in the temple. Yet no one arrested him,
because his hour had not yet come. \bibleverse{21} Jesus said therefore
again to them, ``I am going away, and you will seek me, and you will die
in your sins. Where I go, you can't come.''

\bibleverse{22} The Jews therefore said, ``Will he kill himself, because
he says, `Where I am going, you can't come'?''

\bibleverse{23} He said to them, ``You are from beneath. I am from
above. You are of this world. I am not of this world. \bibleverse{24} I
said therefore to you that you will die in your sins; for unless you
believe that I am\footnote{\textbf{8:24} or, I AM} he, you will die in
your sins.''

\bibleverse{25} They said therefore to him, ``Who are you?''

Jesus said to them, ``Just what I have been saying to you from the
beginning. \bibleverse{26} I have many things to speak and to judge
concerning you. However, he who sent me is true; and the things which I
heard from him, these I say to the world.''

\bibleverse{27} They didn't understand that he spoke to them about the
Father. \bibleverse{28} Jesus therefore said to them, ``When you have
lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and I do
nothing of myself, but as my Father taught me, I say these things.
\bibleverse{29} He who sent me is with me. The Father hasn't left me
alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him.''

\bibleverse{30} As he spoke these things, many believed in him.
\bibleverse{31} Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him,
``If you remain in my word, then you are truly my disciples.
\bibleverse{32} You will know the truth, and the truth will make you
free.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:32} Psalm 119:45}

\bibleverse{33} They answered him, ``We are Abraham's offspring, and
have never been in bondage to anyone. How do you say, `You will be made
free'?''

\bibleverse{34} Jesus answered them, ``Most certainly I tell you,
everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin. \bibleverse{35} A
bondservant doesn't live in the house forever. A son remains forever.
\bibleverse{36} If therefore the Son makes you free, you will be free
indeed. \bibleverse{37} I know that you are Abraham's offspring, yet you
seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you. \bibleverse{38}
I say the things which I have seen with my Father; and you also do the
things which you have seen with your father.''

\bibleverse{39} They answered him, ``Our father is Abraham.''

Jesus said to them, ``If you were Abraham's children, you would do the
works of Abraham. \bibleverse{40} But now you seek to kill me, a man who
has told you the truth which I heard from God. Abraham didn't do this.
\bibleverse{41} You do the works of your father.''

They said to him, ``We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one
Father, God.''

\bibleverse{42} Therefore Jesus said to them, ``If God were your father,
you would love me, for I came out and have come from God. For I haven't
come of myself, but he sent me. \bibleverse{43} Why don't you understand
my speech? Because you can't hear my word. \bibleverse{44} You are of
your father the devil, and you want to do the desires of your father. He
was a murderer from the beginning, and doesn't stand in the truth,
because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks on his
own; for he is a liar, and the father of lies. \bibleverse{45} But
because I tell the truth, you don't believe me. \bibleverse{46} Which of
you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?
\bibleverse{47} He who is of God hears the words of God. For this cause
you don't hear, because you are not of God.''

\bibleverse{48} Then the Jews answered him, ``Don't we say well that you
are a Samaritan, and have a demon?''

\bibleverse{49} Jesus answered, ``I don't have a demon, but I honor my
Father and you dishonor me. \bibleverse{50} But I don't seek my own
glory. There is one who seeks and judges. \bibleverse{51} Most
certainly, I tell you, if a person keeps my word, he will never see
death.''

\bibleverse{52} Then the Jews said to him, ``Now we know that you have a
demon. Abraham died, as did the prophets; and you say, `If a man keeps
my word, he will never taste of death.' \bibleverse{53} Are you greater
than our father Abraham, who died? The prophets died. Who do you make
yourself out to be?''

\bibleverse{54} Jesus answered, ``If I glorify myself, my glory is
nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say that he is
our God. \bibleverse{55} You have not known him, but I know him. If I
said, `I don't know him,' I would be like you, a liar. But I know him
and keep his word. \bibleverse{56} Your father Abraham rejoiced to see
my day. He saw it and was glad.''

\bibleverse{57} The Jews therefore said to him, ``You are not yet fifty
years old! Have you seen Abraham?''

\bibleverse{58} Jesus said to them, ``Most certainly, I tell you, before
Abraham came into existence, I AM.\footnote{\textbf{8:58} Exodus 3:14}
''

\bibleverse{59} Therefore they took up stones to throw at him, but Jesus
hid himself and went out of the temple, having gone through the middle
of them, and so passed by.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-curaciuxf3n-del-ciego-de-nacimiento-en-suxe1bado}{%
\subsection{La curación del ciego de nacimiento en
sábado}\label{la-curaciuxf3n-del-ciego-de-nacimiento-en-suxe1bado}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} Al pasar, vio a un hombre ciego de nacimiento.
\bibleverse{2} Sus discípulos le preguntaron: ``Rabí, ¿quién pecó, este
hombre o sus padres, para que naciera ciego?'' \footnote{\textbf{9:2}
  Luc 13,2}

\bibleverse{3} Jesús respondió: ``Este hombre no pecó, ni tampoco sus
padres, sino para que las obras de Dios se manifiesten en él.
\footnote{\textbf{9:3} Juan 11,4} \bibleverse{4} Yo debo hacer las obras
del que me envió mientras es de día. Se acerca la noche, cuando nadie
puede trabajar. \footnote{\textbf{9:4} Juan 5,17; Jer 13,16}
\bibleverse{5} Mientras estoy en el mundo, soy la luz del mundo''.
\footnote{\textbf{9:5} Juan 12,35; Juan 8,12} \bibleverse{6} Dicho esto,
escupió en el suelo, hizo lodo con la saliva, ungió los ojos del ciego
con el lodo, \footnote{\textbf{9:6} Mar 8,23} \bibleverse{7} y le dijo:
``Ve, lávate en el estanque de Siloé'' (que significa ``Enviado''). Así
que se fue, se lavó y volvió viendo.

\bibleverse{8} Por eso, los vecinos y los que habían visto que era ciego
antes decían: ``¿No es éste el que se sentaba a pedir limosna?''
\bibleverse{9} Otros decían: ``Es él''. Y otros decían: ``Se parece a
él''. Dijo: ``Yo soy''.

\bibleverse{10} Por eso le preguntaban: ``¿Cómo se te abrieron los
ojos?''.

\bibleverse{11} Respondió: ``Un hombre llamado Jesús hizo lodo, me untó
los ojos y me dijo: ``Ve al estanque de Siloé y lávate''. Así que fui y
me lavé, y recibí la vista''.

\bibleverse{12} Entonces le preguntaron: ``¿Dónde está?''. Dijo: ``No lo
sé''.

\hypertarget{el-primer-interrogatorio-de-los-fariseos}{%
\subsection{El primer interrogatorio de los
fariseos}\label{el-primer-interrogatorio-de-los-fariseos}}

\bibleverse{13} Llevaron al que había sido ciego a los fariseos.
\bibleverse{14} Era sábado cuando Jesús hizo el lodo y le abrió los
ojos. \bibleverse{15} También los fariseos le preguntaron cómo había
recibido la vista. Él les dijo: ``Me puso barro en los ojos, me lavé y
veo''.

\bibleverse{16} Por eso algunos de los fariseos decían: ``Este hombre no
es de Dios, porque no guarda el sábado''. Otros decían: ``¿Cómo puede
hacer tales señales un hombre que es pecador?''. Así que hubo división
entre ellos.

\bibleverse{17} Por eso volvieron a preguntar al ciego: ``¿Qué dices de
él, porque te ha abierto los ojos?'' Dijo: ``Es un profeta''.

\hypertarget{el-interrogatorio-de-los-padres}{%
\subsection{El interrogatorio de los
padres}\label{el-interrogatorio-de-los-padres}}

\bibleverse{18} Los judíos, por tanto, no creían respecto a él que había
sido ciego y que había recibido la vista, hasta que llamaron a los
padres del que había recibido la vista, \bibleverse{19} y les
preguntaron: ``¿Es éste vuestro hijo, del que decís que nació ciego?
¿Cómo es que ahora ve?''

\bibleverse{20} Sus padres les respondieron: ``Sabemos que éste es
nuestro hijo y que nació ciego; \bibleverse{21} pero cómo ve ahora, no
lo sabemos; o quién le abrió los ojos, no lo sabemos. Es mayor de edad.
Pregúntale a él. Él hablará por sí mismo''. \bibleverse{22} Sus padres
decían estas cosas porque temían a los judíos, pues éstos ya habían
acordado que si alguno lo confesaba como Cristo, sería expulsado de la
sinagoga. \footnote{\textbf{9:22} Juan 7,13; Juan 12,42} \bibleverse{23}
Por eso sus padres dijeron: ``Es mayor de edad. Pregúntale a él''.

\hypertarget{el-segundo-interrogatorio-del-curado}{%
\subsection{El segundo interrogatorio del
curado}\label{el-segundo-interrogatorio-del-curado}}

\bibleverse{24} Entonces llamaron por segunda vez al ciego y le dijeron:
``Da gloria a Dios. Sabemos que este hombre es un pecador''.

\bibleverse{25} Por eso respondió: ``No sé si es pecador. Una cosa sí
sé: que aunque estaba ciego, ahora veo''.

\bibleverse{26} Le volvieron a decir: ``¿Qué te ha hecho? ¿Cómo te ha
abierto los ojos?''

\bibleverse{27} Él les respondió: ``Ya os lo he dicho, y no me habéis
escuchado. ¿Por qué queréis oírlo otra vez? No queréis también haceros
sus discípulos, ¿verdad?''.

\bibleverse{28} Le insultaron y le dijeron: ``Tú eres su discípulo, pero
nosotros somos discípulos de Moisés. \bibleverse{29} Sabemos que Dios ha
hablado con Moisés. Pero en cuanto a este hombre, no sabemos de dónde
viene''.

\bibleverse{30} El hombre les respondió: ``¡Qué maravilla! No sabéis de
dónde viene, y sin embargo me ha abierto los ojos. \bibleverse{31}
Sabemos que Dios no escucha a los pecadores, pero si alguien es adorador
de Dios y hace su voluntad, le escucha. \footnote{\textbf{9:31} Sal
  66,18; Prov 15,29; Is 1,15} \bibleverse{32} Desde el principio del
mundo no se ha oído decir que alguien haya abierto los ojos a un ciego
de nacimiento. \bibleverse{33} Si este hombre no viniera de Dios, no
podría hacer nada''.

\bibleverse{34} Le respondieron: ``Tú, que has nacido en pecado, ¿nos
enseñas?''. Entonces le echaron.

\hypertarget{la-fe-del-sanado-en-jesuxfas-jesuxfas-como-la-luz-de-los-que-no-ven-y-como-la-ceguera-de-los-que-ven}{%
\subsection{La fe del sanado en Jesús; Jesús como la luz de los que no
ven y como la ceguera de los que
ven}\label{la-fe-del-sanado-en-jesuxfas-jesuxfas-como-la-luz-de-los-que-no-ven-y-como-la-ceguera-de-los-que-ven}}

\bibleverse{35} Jesús oyó que lo habían echado, y encontrándolo, le
dijo: ``¿Crees en el Hijo de Dios?''

\bibleverse{36} Él respondió: ``¿Quién es, Señor, para que crea en él?''

\bibleverse{37} Jesús le dijo: ``Pues lo has visto, y es él quien habla
contigo.'' \footnote{\textbf{9:37} Juan 4,26}

\bibleverse{38} Dijo: ``¡Señor, creo!'' y lo adoró.

\bibleverse{39} Jesús dijo: ``He venido a este mundo para juzgar, para
que los que no ven vean y para que los que ven se vuelvan ciegos''.
\footnote{\textbf{9:39} Mat 13,11-15}

\bibleverse{40} Los fariseos que estaban con él oyeron estas cosas y le
dijeron: ``¿También nosotros somos ciegos?''

\bibleverse{41} Jesús les dijo: ``Si fuerais ciegos, no tendríais
pecado; pero ahora decís: ``Vemos''. Por eso vuestro pecado permanece.
\footnote{\textbf{9:41} Prov 26,12; Juan 15,22}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth.
\bibleverse{2} His disciples asked him, ``Rabbi, who sinned, this man or
his parents, that he was born blind?''

\bibleverse{3} Jesus answered, ``This man didn't sin, nor did his
parents, but that the works of God might be revealed in him.
\bibleverse{4} I must work the works of him who sent me while it is day.
The night is coming, when no one can work. \bibleverse{5} While I am in
the world, I am the light of the world.'' \bibleverse{6} When he had
said this, he spat on the ground, made mud with the saliva, anointed the
blind man's eyes with the mud, \bibleverse{7} and said to him, ``Go,
wash in the pool of Siloam'' (which means ``Sent''). So he went away,
washed, and came back seeing.

\bibleverse{8} Therefore the neighbors and those who saw that he was
blind before said, ``Isn't this he who sat and begged?'' \bibleverse{9}
Others were saying, ``It is he.'' Still others were saying, ``He looks
like him.''

He said, ``I am he.''

\bibleverse{10} They therefore were asking him, ``How were your eyes
opened?''

\bibleverse{11} He answered, ``A man called Jesus made mud, anointed my
eyes, and said to me, `Go to the pool of Siloam and wash.' So I went
away and washed, and I received sight.''

\bibleverse{12} Then they asked him, ``Where is he?''

He said, ``I don't know.''

\bibleverse{13} They brought him who had been blind to the Pharisees.
\bibleverse{14} It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his
eyes. \bibleverse{15} Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how
he received his sight. He said to them, ``He put mud on my eyes, I
washed, and I see.''

\bibleverse{16} Some therefore of the Pharisees said, ``This man is not
from God, because he doesn't keep the Sabbath.''

Others said, ``How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?'' So there
was division among them.

\bibleverse{17} Therefore they asked the blind man again, ``What do you
say about him, because he opened your eyes?''

He said, ``He is a prophet.''

\bibleverse{18} The Jews therefore didn't believe concerning him, that
he had been blind and had received his sight, until they called the
parents of him who had received his sight, \bibleverse{19} and asked
them, ``Is this your son, whom you say was born blind? How then does he
now see?''

\bibleverse{20} His parents answered them, ``We know that this is our
son, and that he was born blind; \bibleverse{21} but how he now sees, we
don't know; or who opened his eyes, we don't know. He is of age. Ask
him. He will speak for himself.'' \bibleverse{22} His parents said these
things because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed
that if any man would confess him as Christ, he would be put out of the
synagogue. \bibleverse{23} Therefore his parents said, ``He is of age.
Ask him.''

\bibleverse{24} So they called the man who was blind a second time, and
said to him, ``Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.''

\bibleverse{25} He therefore answered, ``I don't know if he is a sinner.
One thing I do know: that though I was blind, now I see.''

\bibleverse{26} They said to him again, ``What did he do to you? How did
he open your eyes?''

\bibleverse{27} He answered them, ``I told you already, and you didn't
listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You don't also want to become
his disciples, do you?''

\bibleverse{28} They insulted him and said, ``You are his disciple, but
we are disciples of Moses. \bibleverse{29} We know that God has spoken
to Moses. But as for this man, we don't know where he comes from.''

\bibleverse{30} The man answered them, ``How amazing! You don't know
where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes. \bibleverse{31} We know that
God doesn't listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshiper of God and
does his will, he listens to him.\footnote{\textbf{9:31} Psalm 66:18;
  Proverbs 15:29; 28:9} \bibleverse{32} Since the world began it has
never been heard of that anyone opened the eyes of someone born blind.
\bibleverse{33} If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.''

\bibleverse{34} They answered him, ``You were altogether born in sins,
and do you teach us?'' Then they threw him out.

\bibleverse{35} Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding
him, he said, ``Do you believe in the Son of God?''

\bibleverse{36} He answered, ``Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in
him?''

\bibleverse{37} Jesus said to him, ``You have both seen him, and it is
he who speaks with you.''

\bibleverse{38} He said, ``Lord, I believe!'' and he worshiped him.

\bibleverse{39} Jesus said, ``I came into this world for judgment, that
those who don't see may see; and that those who see may become blind.''

\bibleverse{40} Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these
things, and said to him, ``Are we also blind?''

\bibleverse{41} Jesus said to them, ``If you were blind, you would have
no sin; but now you say, `We see.' Therefore your sin remains.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-lenguaje-figurado-del-pastor-y-ladruxf3n-y-del-buen-pastor-y-asalariado}{%
\subsection{El lenguaje figurado del pastor y ladrón y del buen pastor y
asalariado}\label{el-lenguaje-figurado-del-pastor-y-ladruxf3n-y-del-buen-pastor-y-asalariado}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Os aseguro que el que no entra por la puerta en el
redil de las ovejas, sino que sube por otro camino, es un ladrón y un
salteador. \bibleverse{2} Pero el que entra por la puerta es el pastor
de las ovejas. \bibleverse{3} El guardián le abre la puerta, y las
ovejas escuchan su voz. Llama a sus ovejas por su nombre y las saca.
\bibleverse{4} Cada vez que saca a sus ovejas, va delante de ellas; y
las ovejas le siguen, porque conocen su voz. \bibleverse{5} No seguirán
en absoluto a un extraño, sino que huirán de él, porque no conocen la
voz de los extraños.'' \bibleverse{6} Jesús les dijo esta parábola, pero
no entendieron lo que les decía.

\hypertarget{yo-soy-la-puerta-para-las-ovejas}{%
\subsection{¡Yo soy la puerta para las
ovejas!}\label{yo-soy-la-puerta-para-las-ovejas}}

\bibleverse{7} Por eso Jesús les volvió a decir: ``Os aseguro que yo soy
la puerta de las ovejas. \bibleverse{8} Todos los que vinieron antes que
yo son ladrones y salteadores, pero las ovejas no les hicieron caso.
\bibleverse{9} Yo soy la puerta. Si alguien entra por mí, se salvará, y
entrará y saldrá y hallará pastos. \footnote{\textbf{10:9} Juan 14,6}
\bibleverse{10} El ladrón sólo viene a robar, matar y destruir. Yo he
venido para que tengan vida y la tengan en abundancia.

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-como-el-buen-pastor}{%
\subsection{Jesús como el buen
pastor}\label{jesuxfas-como-el-buen-pastor}}

\bibleverse{11} ``Yo soy el buen pastor. El buen pastor da su vida por
las ovejas. \bibleverse{12} El que es asalariado y no pastor, que no es
dueño de las ovejas, ve venir al lobo, deja las ovejas y huye. El lobo
arrebata las ovejas y las dispersa. \footnote{\textbf{10:12} Sal 23,1;
  Is 40,11; Ezeq 34,11-23; Juan 15,13; Heb 13,20} \bibleverse{13} El
jornalero huye porque es jornalero y no cuida de las ovejas.
\bibleverse{14} Yo soy el buen pastor. Conozco a las mías, y soy
conocido por las mías; \footnote{\textbf{10:14} 2Tim 2,19}
\bibleverse{15} así como el Padre me conoce, y yo conozco al Padre. Yo
doy mi vida por las ovejas. \bibleverse{16} Tengo otras ovejas que no
son de este redil. Debo traerlas también, y oirán mi voz. Serán un solo
rebaño con un solo pastor. \footnote{\textbf{10:16} Juan 11,52; Hech
  10,34-35} \bibleverse{17} Por eso el Padre me ama, porque doy mi vida
para volver a tomarla. \bibleverse{18} Nadie me la quita, sino que yo
mismo la pongo. Tengo poder para ponerla, y tengo poder para volver a
tomarla. Este mandamiento lo recibí de mi Padre''. \footnote{\textbf{10:18}
  Juan 5,26}

\bibleverse{19} Por eso volvió a surgir una división entre los judíos a
causa de estas palabras. \footnote{\textbf{10:19} Juan 7,43; Juan 9,16}
\bibleverse{20} Muchos de ellos decían: ``¡Tiene un demonio y está loco!
¿Por qué le escucháis?'' \footnote{\textbf{10:20} Juan 7,20; Mar 3,21}
\bibleverse{21} Otros decían: ``Estos no son los dichos de un poseído
por un demonio. No es posible que un demonio abra los ojos de los
ciegos, ¿verdad?''

\hypertarget{la-uxfaltima-justificaciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-a-los-juduxedos-en-la-fiesta-de-la-dedicaciuxf3n-del-templo}{%
\subsection{La última justificación de Jesús a los judíos en la fiesta
de la dedicación del
templo}\label{la-uxfaltima-justificaciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-a-los-juduxedos-en-la-fiesta-de-la-dedicaciuxf3n-del-templo}}

\bibleverse{22} Era la fiesta de la Dedicación en Jerusalén.
\bibleverse{23} Era invierno, y Jesús andaba por el templo, en el
pórtico de Salomón. \footnote{\textbf{10:23} Hech 3,11} \bibleverse{24}
Los judíos se acercaron a él y le dijeron: ``¿Hasta cuándo nos vas a
tener en suspenso? Si eres el Cristo, dínoslo claramente''.

\bibleverse{25} Jesús les respondió: ``Os lo he dicho, y no creéis. Las
obras que hago en nombre de mi Padre, éstas dan testimonio de mí.
\footnote{\textbf{10:25} Juan 5,36} \bibleverse{26} Pero vosotros no
creéis, porque no sois de mis ovejas, como os he dicho. \footnote{\textbf{10:26}
  Juan 8,45; Juan 8,47} \bibleverse{27} Mis ovejas oyen mi voz, y yo las
conozco, y me siguen. \bibleverse{28} Yo les doy vida eterna. Nunca
perecerán, y nadie las arrebatará de mi mano. \bibleverse{29} Mi Padre,
que me las ha dado, es más grande que todos. Nadie puede arrebatarlos de
la mano de mi Padre. \bibleverse{30} Yo y el Padre somos uno''.

\bibleverse{31} Por eso los judíos volvieron a tomar piedras para
apedrearlo. \footnote{\textbf{10:31} Juan 8,59} \bibleverse{32} Jesús
les respondió: ``Os he mostrado muchas obras buenas de mi Padre. ¿Por
cuál de esas obras me apedreáis?''

\bibleverse{33} Los judíos le respondieron: ``No te apedreamos por una
obra buena, sino por blasfemia, porque tú, siendo hombre, te haces
Dios''. \footnote{\textbf{10:33} Juan 5,18; Mat 9,3; Mat 26,65}

\bibleverse{34} Jesús les contestó: ``¿No está escrito en vuestra ley:
``Yo dije que sois dioses''? \footnote{\textbf{10:34} Salmo 82:6}
\bibleverse{35} Si los llamó dioses, a los que vino la palabra de Dios
(y la Escritura no puede ser quebrantada), \bibleverse{36} ¿decís de
aquel a quien el Padre santificó y envió al mundo: ``Tú blasfemas'',
porque yo dije: ``Yo soy el Hijo de Dios''? \footnote{\textbf{10:36}
  Juan 5,17-20} \bibleverse{37} Si no hago las obras de mi Padre, no me
creáis. \bibleverse{38} Pero si las hago, aunque no me creáis, creed en
las obras, para que sepáis y creáis que el Padre está en mí, y yo en el
Padre.''

\bibleverse{39} Volvieron a buscarlo para apresarlo, pero se les escapó
de las manos. \footnote{\textbf{10:39} Juan 8,59; Luc 4,30}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-y-luxe1zaro-jesuxfas-como-la-resurrecciuxf3n-y-la-vida}{%
\subsection{Jesús y Lázaro; Jesús como la resurrección y la
vida}\label{jesuxfas-y-luxe1zaro-jesuxfas-como-la-resurrecciuxf3n-y-la-vida}}

\bibleverse{40} Volvió a pasar el Jordán, al lugar donde Juan bautizaba
al principio, y se quedó allí. \footnote{\textbf{10:40} Juan 1,28}
\bibleverse{41} Muchos se acercaron a él. Decían: ``Ciertamente Juan no
hizo ninguna señal, pero todo lo que Juan dijo de este hombre es
verdad''. \bibleverse{42} Muchos creyeron allí en él.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Most certainly, I tell you, one who doesn't enter by
the door into the sheep fold, but climbs up some other way, is a thief
and a robber. \bibleverse{2} But one who enters in by the door is the
shepherd of the sheep. \bibleverse{3} The gatekeeper opens the gate for
him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name
and leads them out. \bibleverse{4} Whenever he brings out his own sheep,
he goes before them; and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.
\bibleverse{5} They will by no means follow a stranger, but will flee
from him; for they don't know the voice of strangers.'' \bibleverse{6}
Jesus spoke this parable to them, but they didn't understand what he was
telling them.

\bibleverse{7} Jesus therefore said to them again, ``Most certainly, I
tell you, I am the sheep's door. \bibleverse{8} All who came before me
are thieves and robbers, but the sheep didn't listen to them.
\bibleverse{9} I am the door. If anyone enters in by me, he will be
saved, and will go in and go out and will find pasture. \bibleverse{10}
The thief only comes to steal, kill, and destroy. I came that they may
have life, and may have it abundantly.

\bibleverse{11} ``I am the good shepherd.\footnote{\textbf{10:11} Isaiah
  40:11; Ezekiel 34:11-12,15,22} The good shepherd lays down his life
for the sheep. \bibleverse{12} He who is a hired hand, and not a
shepherd, who doesn't own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, leaves the
sheep, and flees. The wolf snatches the sheep and scatters them.
\bibleverse{13} The hired hand flees because he is a hired hand and
doesn't care for the sheep. \bibleverse{14} I am the good shepherd. I
know my own, and I'm known by my own; \bibleverse{15} even as the Father
knows me, and I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep.
\bibleverse{16} I have other sheep which are not of this
fold.\footnote{\textbf{10:16} Isaiah 56:8} I must bring them also, and
they will hear my voice. They will become one flock with one shepherd.
\bibleverse{17} Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my
life, \footnote{\textbf{10:17} Isaiah 53:7-8} that I may take it again.
\bibleverse{18} No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down by
myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.
I received this commandment from my Father.''

\bibleverse{19} Therefore a division arose again among the Jews because
of these words. \bibleverse{20} Many of them said, ``He has a demon and
is insane! Why do you listen to him?'' \bibleverse{21} Others said,
``These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon. It isn't
possible for a demon to open the eyes of the blind, is it?''\footnote{\textbf{10:21}
  Exodus 4:11}

\bibleverse{22} It was the Feast of the Dedication\footnote{\textbf{10:22}
  The ``Feast of the Dedication'' is the Greek name for ``Hanukkah'', a
  celebration of the rededication of the Temple.} at Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{23} It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple, in
Solomon's porch. \bibleverse{24} The Jews therefore came around him and
said to him, ``How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the
Christ, tell us plainly.''

\bibleverse{25} Jesus answered them, ``I told you, and you don't
believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these testify about
me. \bibleverse{26} But you don't believe, because you are not of my
sheep, as I told you. \bibleverse{27} My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me. \bibleverse{28} I give eternal life to them.
They will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
\bibleverse{29} My Father who has given them to me is greater than all.
No one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand. \bibleverse{30} I
and the Father are one.''

\bibleverse{31} Therefore the Jews took up stones again to stone him.
\bibleverse{32} Jesus answered them, ``I have shown you many good works
from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?''

\bibleverse{33} The Jews answered him, ``We don't stone you for a good
work, but for blasphemy, because you, being a man, make yourself God.''

\bibleverse{34} Jesus answered them, ``Isn't it written in your law, `I
said, you are gods?'\footnote{\textbf{10:34} Psalm 82:6} \bibleverse{35}
If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture
can't be broken), \bibleverse{36} do you say of him whom the Father
sanctified and sent into the world, `You blaspheme,' because I said, `I
am the Son of God?' \bibleverse{37} If I don't do the works of my
Father, don't believe me. \bibleverse{38} But if I do them, though you
don't believe me, believe the works, that you may know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in the Father.''

\bibleverse{39} They sought again to seize him, and he went out of their
hand. \bibleverse{40} He went away again beyond the Jordan into the
place where John was baptizing at first, and he stayed there.
\bibleverse{41} Many came to him. They said, ``John indeed did no sign,
but everything that John said about this man is true.'' \bibleverse{42}
Many believed in him there.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Un hombre estaba enfermo, Lázaro, de Betania, del pueblo
de María y de su hermana Marta. \footnote{\textbf{11:1} Luc 10,38-39}
\bibleverse{2} Era aquella María, que había ungido al Señor con ungüento
y enjugado sus pies con sus cabellos, cuyo hermano Lázaro estaba
enfermo. \footnote{\textbf{11:2} Juan 12,3} \bibleverse{3} Las hermanas,
pues, enviaron a decirle: ``Señor, he aquí que está enfermo aquel a
quien tienes gran afecto.''

\bibleverse{4} Pero Jesús, al oírlo, dijo: ``Esta enfermedad no es para
la muerte, sino para la gloria de Dios, para que el Hijo de Dios sea
glorificado por ella.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:4} Juan 9,3} \bibleverse{5}
Jesús amaba a Marta, a su hermana y a Lázaro. \bibleverse{6} Por eso, al
saber que estaba enfermo, se quedó dos días en el lugar donde estaba.
\bibleverse{7} Luego, después de esto, dijo a los discípulos: ``Vamos a
Judea de nuevo''.

\bibleverse{8} Los discípulos le preguntaron: ``Rabí, los judíos querían
apedrearte. ¿Vas a ir allí de nuevo?'' \footnote{\textbf{11:8} Juan
  10,31}

\bibleverse{9} Jesús respondió: ``¿No hay doce horas de luz? Si un
hombre camina de día, no tropieza, porque ve la luz de este mundo.
\footnote{\textbf{11:9} Juan 9,4-5} \bibleverse{10} Pero si un hombre
camina de noche, tropieza, porque la luz no está en él''. \footnote{\textbf{11:10}
  Juan 12,35} \bibleverse{11} Dijo estas cosas, y después les dijo:
``Nuestro amigo Lázaro se ha dormido, pero yo voy para despertarlo del
sueño.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:11} Mat 9,24}

\bibleverse{12} Entonces los discípulos dijeron: ``Señor, si se ha
dormido, se recuperará''.

\bibleverse{13} Ahora bien, Jesús había hablado de su muerte, pero ellos
pensaron que hablaba de descansar en el sueño. \bibleverse{14} Entonces
Jesús les dijo claramente: ``Lázaro ha muerto. \bibleverse{15} Me alegro
por vosotros de no haber estado allí, para que creáis. Sin embargo,
vayamos a verlo''.

\bibleverse{16} Entonces Tomás, que se llama Dídimo,\footnote{\textbf{11:16}
  ``Dídimo'' significa ``gemelo''.} dijo a sus condiscípulos: ``Vayamos
también nosotros, para morir con él.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:16} Juan
  20,24-28}

\hypertarget{el-regreso-de-jesuxfas-a-betania-su-encuentro-con-martha-y-maria}{%
\subsection{El regreso de Jesús a Betania; su encuentro con Martha y
Maria}\label{el-regreso-de-jesuxfas-a-betania-su-encuentro-con-martha-y-maria}}

\bibleverse{17} Cuando llegó Jesús, se dio cuenta de que ya llevaba
cuatro días en el sepulcro. \bibleverse{18} Betania estaba cerca de
Jerusalén, a unos quince pasos\footnote{\textbf{11:18} 15 estadios son
  unos 2,8 kilómetros o 1,7 millas} . \bibleverse{19} Muchos de los
judíos se habían reunido con las mujeres en torno a Marta y María, para
consolarlas por su hermano. \bibleverse{20} Cuando Marta se enteró de
que Jesús venía, fue a recibirlo, pero María se quedó en la casa.
\bibleverse{21} Entonces Marta dijo a Jesús: ``Señor, si hubieras estado
aquí, mi hermano no habría muerto. \bibleverse{22} Incluso ahora sé que
todo lo que pidas a Dios, Dios te lo dará''.

\bibleverse{23} Jesús le dijo: ``Tu hermano resucitará''.

\bibleverse{24} Marta le dijo: ``Sé que resucitará en la resurrección en
el último día''. \footnote{\textbf{11:24} Juan 5,28-29; Juan 6,40; Mat
  22,23-33}

\bibleverse{25} Jesús le dijo: ``Yo soy la resurrección y la vida. El
que cree en mí seguirá viviendo, aunque muera. \bibleverse{26} El que
vive y cree en mí no morirá jamás. ¿Crees en esto?'' \footnote{\textbf{11:26}
  Juan 8,51}

\bibleverse{27} Ella le dijo: ``Sí, Señor. He llegado a creer que tú
eres el Cristo, el Hijo de Dios, el que viene al mundo''. \footnote{\textbf{11:27}
  Mat 16,16}

\bibleverse{28} Cuando hubo dicho esto, se fue y llamó a María, su
hermana, en secreto, diciendo: ``El Maestro está aquí y te llama.''

\bibleverse{29} Al oír esto, se levantó rápidamente y fue hacia él.
\bibleverse{30} Pero Jesús no había entrado aún en la aldea, sino que
estaba en el lugar donde Marta lo había encontrado. \bibleverse{31}
Entonces los judíos que estaban con ella en la casa y la consolaban, al
ver que María se levantaba rápidamente y salía, la siguieron diciendo:
``Va al sepulcro a llorar allí.''

\bibleverse{32} Por eso, cuando María llegó a donde estaba Jesús y lo
vio, se postró a sus pies, diciéndole: ``Señor, si hubieras estado aquí,
mi hermano no habría muerto.''

\bibleverse{33} Cuando Jesús la vio llorar, y a los judíos que venían
con ella, gimió en el espíritu y se turbó, \footnote{\textbf{11:33} Juan
  13,21}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-en-la-tumba-y-su-oraciuxf3n-la-resurrecciuxf3n-de-luxe1zaro-de-entre-los-muertos}{%
\subsection{Jesús en la tumba y su oración; la resurrección de Lázaro de
entre los
muertos}\label{jesuxfas-en-la-tumba-y-su-oraciuxf3n-la-resurrecciuxf3n-de-luxe1zaro-de-entre-los-muertos}}

\bibleverse{34} y dijo: ``¿Dónde lo habéis puesto?'' Le dijeron:
``Señor, ven a ver''.

\bibleverse{35} Jesús lloró.

\bibleverse{36} Por eso los judíos decían: ``¡Vean cuánto afecto le
tenía!''. \bibleverse{37} Algunos de ellos decían: ``¿No podía este
hombre, que abrió los ojos del ciego, evitar que éste muriera?''
\footnote{\textbf{11:37} Juan 9,7}

\bibleverse{38} Jesús, gimiendo de nuevo en su interior, llegó al
sepulcro. Era una cueva, y una piedra estaba apoyada en ella.
\footnote{\textbf{11:38} Mat 27,60} \bibleverse{39} Jesús dijo: ``Quita
la piedra''. Marta, la hermana del que había muerto, le dijo: ``Señor, a
estas alturas hay un hedor, pues lleva cuatro días muerto''.

\bibleverse{40} Jesús le dijo: ¿No te dije que, si crees, verás la
gloria de Dios?''

\bibleverse{41} Entonces quitaron la piedra del lugar donde yacía el
muerto.\footnote{\textbf{11:41} NU omite ``del lugar donde yacía el
  muerto''.} Jesús levantó los ojos y dijo: ``Padre, te agradezco que me
hayas escuchado. \bibleverse{42} Sé que siempre me escuchas, pero a
causa de la multitud que está alrededor he dicho esto, para que crean
que tú me has enviado.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:42} Juan 12,30}
\bibleverse{43} Cuando hubo dicho esto, gritó a gran voz: ``¡Lázaro, ven
afuera!''

\bibleverse{44} El que estaba muerto salió, atado de pies y manos con
vendas, y su rostro estaba envuelto con un paño. Jesús les dijo:
``Libéralo y déjalo ir''.

\hypertarget{los-efectos-del-milagro-resoluciuxf3n-de-muerte-del-sumo-consejo-jesuxfas-escapa-a-efrauxedn}{%
\subsection{Los efectos del milagro; Resolución de muerte del sumo
consejo; Jesús escapa a
Efraín}\label{los-efectos-del-milagro-resoluciuxf3n-de-muerte-del-sumo-consejo-jesuxfas-escapa-a-efrauxedn}}

\bibleverse{45} Por eso, muchos de los judíos que se acercaron a María y
vieron lo que hacía Jesús creyeron en él. \bibleverse{46} Pero algunos
de ellos se fueron a los fariseos y les contaron las cosas que Jesús
había hecho. \bibleverse{47} Entonces los jefes de los sacerdotes y los
fariseos reunieron un consejo y dijeron: ``¿Qué hacemos? Porque este
hombre hace muchas señales. \footnote{\textbf{11:47} Mat 26,3-4}
\bibleverse{48} Si lo dejamos así, todos creerán en él, y vendrán los
romanos y nos quitarán nuestro lugar y nuestra nación.''

\bibleverse{49} Pero uno de ellos, Caifás, siendo sumo sacerdote aquel
año, les dijo: ``Vosotros no sabéis nada en absoluto, \bibleverse{50} ni
consideráis que nos convenga que un hombre muera por el pueblo, y que no
perezca toda la nación.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:50} Juan 18,14}
\bibleverse{51} Pero él no dijo esto por sí mismo, sino que, siendo sumo
sacerdote aquel año, profetizó que Jesús moriría por la nación,
\footnote{\textbf{11:51} Éxod 28,30; Núm 27,21} \bibleverse{52} y no
sólo por la nación, sino también para reunir en uno a los hijos de Dios
que están dispersos. \footnote{\textbf{11:52} Juan 7,35; Juan 10,16; 1Jn
  2,2} \bibleverse{53} Así que desde aquel día tomaron consejo para
darle muerte. \bibleverse{54} Así que Jesús ya no andaba abiertamente
entre los judíos, sino que se fue de allí al campo, cerca del desierto,
a una ciudad llamada Efraín. Allí se quedó con sus discípulos.

\bibleverse{55} Se acercaba la Pascua de los judíos. Muchos subieron del
campo a Jerusalén antes de la Pascua, para purificarse. \footnote{\textbf{11:55}
  2Cró 30,17-18} \bibleverse{56} Entonces buscaban a Jesús y hablaban
entre sí, estando en el templo: ``¿Qué pensáis, que no viene a la
fiesta?'' \bibleverse{57} Ahora bien, los jefes de los sacerdotes y los
fariseos habían ordenado que si alguien sabía dónde estaba, lo
denunciara para poder apresarlo.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, of the
village of Mary and her sister, Martha. \bibleverse{2} It was that Mary
who had anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her
hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. \bibleverse{3} The sisters
therefore sent to him, saying, ``Lord, behold, he for whom you have
great affection is sick.''

\bibleverse{4} But when Jesus heard it, he said, ``This sickness is not
to death, but for the glory of God, that God's Son may be glorified by
it.'' \bibleverse{5} Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and
Lazarus. \bibleverse{6} When therefore he heard that he was sick, he
stayed two days in the place where he was. \bibleverse{7} Then after
this he said to the disciples, ``Let's go into Judea again.''

\bibleverse{8} The disciples asked him, ``Rabbi, the Jews were just
trying to stone you. Are you going there again?''

\bibleverse{9} Jesus answered, ``Aren't there twelve hours of daylight?
If a man walks in the day, he doesn't stumble, because he sees the light
of this world. \bibleverse{10} But if a man walks in the night, he
stumbles, because the light isn't in him.'' \bibleverse{11} He said
these things, and after that, he said to them, ``Our friend Lazarus has
fallen asleep, but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep.''

\bibleverse{12} The disciples therefore said, ``Lord, if he has fallen
asleep, he will recover.''

\bibleverse{13} Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that
he spoke of taking rest in sleep. \bibleverse{14} So Jesus said to them
plainly then, ``Lazarus is dead. \bibleverse{15} I am glad for your
sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless, let's
go to him.''

\bibleverse{16} Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus,\footnote{\textbf{11:16}
  ``Didymus'' means ``Twin''.} said to his fellow disciples, ``Let's
also go, that we may die with him.''

\bibleverse{17} So when Jesus came, he found that he had been in the
tomb four days already. \bibleverse{18} Now Bethany was near Jerusalem,
about fifteen stadia\footnote{\textbf{11:18} 15 stadia is about 2.8
  kilometers or 1.7 miles} away. \bibleverse{19} Many of the Jews had
joined the women around Martha and Mary, to console them concerning
their brother. \bibleverse{20} Then when Martha heard that Jesus was
coming, she went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house.
\bibleverse{21} Therefore Martha said to Jesus, ``Lord, if you would
have been here, my brother wouldn't have died. \bibleverse{22} Even now
I know that whatever you ask of God, God will give you.''

\bibleverse{23} Jesus said to her, ``Your brother will rise again.''

\bibleverse{24} Martha said to him, ``I know that he will rise again in
the resurrection at the last day.''

\bibleverse{25} Jesus said to her, ``I am the resurrection and the life.
He who believes in me will still live, even if he dies. \bibleverse{26}
Whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?''

\bibleverse{27} She said to him, ``Yes, Lord. I have come to believe
that you are the Christ, God's Son, he who comes into the world.''

\bibleverse{28} When she had said this, she went away and called Mary,
her sister, secretly, saying, ``The Teacher is here and is calling
you.''

\bibleverse{29} When she heard this, she arose quickly and went to him.
\bibleverse{30} Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in
the place where Martha met him. \bibleverse{31} Then the Jews who were
with her in the house and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that
she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying, ``She is going
to the tomb to weep there.''

\bibleverse{32} Therefore when Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him,
she fell down at his feet, saying to him, ``Lord, if you would have been
here, my brother wouldn't have died.''

\bibleverse{33} When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews
weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit and was troubled,
\bibleverse{34} and said, ``Where have you laid him?''

They told him, ``Lord, come and see.''

\bibleverse{35} Jesus wept.

\bibleverse{36} The Jews therefore said, ``See how much affection he had
for him!'' \bibleverse{37} Some of them said, ``Couldn't this man, who
opened the eyes of him who was blind, have also kept this man from
dying?''

\bibleverse{38} Jesus therefore, again groaning in himself, came to the
tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against it. \bibleverse{39}
Jesus said, ``Take away the stone.''

Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said to him, ``Lord, by this
time there is a stench, for he has been dead four days.''

\bibleverse{40} Jesus said to her, ``Didn't I tell you that if you
believed, you would see God's glory?''

\bibleverse{41} So they took away the stone from the place where the
dead man was lying.\footnote{\textbf{11:41} NU omits ``from the place
  where the dead man was lying.''} Jesus lifted up his eyes and said,
``Father, I thank you that you listened to me. \bibleverse{42} I know
that you always listen to me, but because of the multitude standing
around I said this, that they may believe that you sent me.''
\bibleverse{43} When he had said this, he cried with a loud voice,
``Lazarus, come out!''

\bibleverse{44} He who was dead came out, bound hand and foot with
wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with a cloth.

Jesus said to them, ``Free him, and let him go.''

\bibleverse{45} Therefore many of the Jews who came to Mary and saw what
Jesus did believed in him. \bibleverse{46} But some of them went away to
the Pharisees and told them the things which Jesus had done.
\bibleverse{47} The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a
council, and said, ``What are we doing? For this man does many signs.
\bibleverse{48} If we leave him alone like this, everyone will believe
in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our
nation.''

\bibleverse{49} But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest
that year, said to them, ``You know nothing at all, \bibleverse{50} nor
do you consider that it is advantageous for us that one man should die
for the people, and that the whole nation not perish.'' \bibleverse{51}
Now he didn't say this of himself, but being high priest that year, he
prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation, \bibleverse{52} and not
for the nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the
children of God who are scattered abroad. \bibleverse{53} So from that
day forward they took counsel that they might put him to death.
\bibleverse{54} Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews,
but departed from there into the country near the wilderness, to a city
called Ephraim. He stayed there with his disciples.

\bibleverse{55} Now the Passover of the Jews was at hand. Many went up
from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover, to purify themselves.
\bibleverse{56} Then they sought for Jesus and spoke with one another as
they stood in the temple, ``What do you think---that he isn't coming to
the feast at all?'' \bibleverse{57} Now the chief priests and the
Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew where he was, he should
report it, that they might seize him.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-unciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-consagraciuxf3n-de-la-muerte-en-betania}{%
\subsection{La unción de Jesús (consagración de la muerte) en
Betania}\label{la-unciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-consagraciuxf3n-de-la-muerte-en-betania}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Seis días antes de la Pascua, Jesús llegó a Betania,
donde estaba Lázaro, que había estado muerto, al que resucitó de entre
los muertos. \footnote{\textbf{12:1} Juan 11,1; Juan 11,43}
\bibleverse{2} Y le prepararon allí una cena. Marta servía, pero Lázaro
era uno de los que se sentaban a la mesa con él. \bibleverse{3} Entonces
María tomó una libra\footnote{\textbf{12:3} 300 denarios era el salario
  de un año para un trabajador agrícola.} de ungüento de nardo puro, muy
precioso, y ungió los pies de Jesús y le secó los pies con sus cabellos.
La casa se llenó de la fragancia del ungüento. \footnote{\textbf{12:3}
  Luc 7,38}

\bibleverse{4} Entonces Judas Iscariote, hijo de Simón, uno de sus
discípulos, que lo iba a traicionar, dijo: \bibleverse{5} ``¿Por qué no
se vendió este ungüento por trescientos denarios y se dio a los
pobres?'' \bibleverse{6} Esto lo dijo, no porque se preocupara por los
pobres, sino porque era un ladrón, y teniendo la bolsa, solía robar lo
que se echaba en ella. \footnote{\textbf{12:6} Luc 8,3}

\bibleverse{7} Pero Jesús dijo: ``Dejadla en paz. Ha guardado esto para
el día de mi entierro. \bibleverse{8} Porque siempre tenéis a los pobres
con vosotros, pero no siempre me tenéis a mí''. \footnote{\textbf{12:8}
  Deut 15,11}

\bibleverse{9} Se enteró, pues, una gran multitud de judíos de que
estaba allí; y vinieron, no sólo por causa de Jesús, sino también para
ver a Lázaro, a quien había resucitado de entre los muertos.
\bibleverse{10} Pero los jefes de los sacerdotes conspiraron para dar
muerte también a Lázaro, \bibleverse{11} porque a causa de él muchos de
los judíos se fueron y creyeron en Jesús.

\hypertarget{la-entrada-de-jesuxfas-a-jerusaluxe9n-el-domingo-de-ramos}{%
\subsection{La entrada de Jesús a Jerusalén el Domingo de
Ramos}\label{la-entrada-de-jesuxfas-a-jerusaluxe9n-el-domingo-de-ramos}}

\bibleverse{12} Al día siguiente, una gran multitud había acudido a la
fiesta. Al enterarse de que Jesús venía a Jerusalén, \bibleverse{13}
tomaron las ramas de las palmeras y salieron a recibirlo, y gritaron:
``¡Hosanna!\footnote{\textbf{12:13} ``Hosanna'' significa ``sálvanos'' o
  ``ayúdanos, te rogamos''.} Bendito el que viene en nombre del
Señor,\footnote{\textbf{12:13} Salmo 118:25-26} el Rey de Israel''.
\footnote{\textbf{12:13} Sal 118,25-26}

\bibleverse{14} Jesús, habiendo encontrado un asnillo, se sentó en él.
Como está escrito: \bibleverse{15} ``No temas, hija de Sión. He aquí que
viene tu Rey, sentado en un pollino de asna''. \footnote{\textbf{12:15}
  Zacarías 9:9} \bibleverse{16} Sus discípulos no entendían estas cosas
al principio, pero cuando Jesús fue glorificado, entonces se acordaron
de que estas cosas estaban escritas sobre él, y de que le habían hecho
estas cosas. \bibleverse{17} La multitud, pues, que estaba con él cuando
llamó a Lázaro del sepulcro y lo resucitó de entre los muertos, daba
testimonio de ello. \bibleverse{18} Por esta razón también la multitud
fue a su encuentro, porque oyeron que había hecho esta señal.
\bibleverse{19} Entonces los fariseos decían entre sí: ``Mirad cómo no
conseguís nada. He aquí que el mundo ha ido tras él''. \footnote{\textbf{12:19}
  Juan 11,48}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-anuncia-su-sufrimiento-mortal-y-su-subsiguiente-glorificaciuxf3n-como-salvador-del-mundo}{%
\subsection{Jesús anuncia su sufrimiento mortal y su subsiguiente
glorificación como salvador del
mundo}\label{jesuxfas-anuncia-su-sufrimiento-mortal-y-su-subsiguiente-glorificaciuxf3n-como-salvador-del-mundo}}

\bibleverse{20} Había algunos griegos entre los que subían a adorar en
la fiesta. \bibleverse{21} Estos, pues, se acercaron a Felipe, que era
de Betsaida de Galilea, y le preguntaron: ``Señor, queremos ver a
Jesús.'' \footnote{\textbf{12:21} Juan 1,44} \bibleverse{22} Felipe vino
y se lo comunicó a Andrés, y a su vez, Andrés vino con Felipe, y se lo
comunicaron a Jesús.

\bibleverse{23} Jesús les respondió: ``Ha llegado el momento de que el
Hijo del Hombre sea glorificado. \bibleverse{24} De cierto os digo que
si el grano de trigo no cae en la tierra y muere, queda solo. Pero si
muere, da mucho fruto. \footnote{\textbf{12:24} Rom 14,9; 1Cor 15,36}
\bibleverse{25} El que ama su vida la perderá. El que odia su vida en
este mundo, la conservará para la vida eterna. \footnote{\textbf{12:25}
  Mat 10,39; Mat 16,25; Luc 17,33} \bibleverse{26} El que me sirve, que
me siga. Donde yo esté, allí estará también mi servidor. Si alguien me
sirve, el Padre lo honrará. \footnote{\textbf{12:26} Juan 17,24}

\bibleverse{27} ``Ahora mi alma está turbada. ¿Qué voy a decir? ¿Padre,
sálvame de está hora? Pero he venido a está hora por esta causa.
\footnote{\textbf{12:27} Mat 26,38} \bibleverse{28} ¡Padre, glorifica tu
nombre!'' Entonces salió una voz del cielo que decía: ``Lo he
glorificado y lo volveré a glorificar''. \footnote{\textbf{12:28} Mat
  3,17; Mat 17,5; Juan 13,31}

\bibleverse{29} Por eso, la multitud que estaba de pie y lo oyó, dijo
que había tronado. Otros decían: ``Un ángel le ha hablado''.

\bibleverse{30} Jesús respondió: ``Esta voz no ha venido por mí, sino
por vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{12:30} Juan 11,42} \bibleverse{31} Ahora
es el juicio de este mundo. Ahora el príncipe de este mundo será echado
fuera. \footnote{\textbf{12:31} Juan 14,30; Juan 16,11; Luc 10,18}
\bibleverse{32} Y yo, si soy levantado de la tierra, atraeré a todos
hacia mí''. \footnote{\textbf{12:32} Juan 8,28} \bibleverse{33} Pero él
dijo esto, dando a entender con qué clase de muerte debía morir.

\bibleverse{34} La multitud le respondió: ``Hemos oído por la ley que el
Cristo permanece para siempre.\footnote{\textbf{12:34} Isaías 9:7;
  Daniel 2:44; Véase Isaías 53:8} ¿Cómo dices que el Hijo del Hombre
debe ser levantado? ¿Quién es ese Hijo del Hombre?'' \footnote{\textbf{12:34}
  Sal 110,4; Dan 7,14}

\bibleverse{35} Por eso Jesús les dijo: ``Todavía un poco de tiempo la
luz está con vosotros. Caminen mientras tienen la luz, para que las
tinieblas no los alcancen. El que camina en las tinieblas no sabe a
dónde va. \footnote{\textbf{12:35} Juan 11,10} \bibleverse{36} Mientras
tengáis la luz, creed en la luz, para que seáis hijos de la luz''. Jesús
dijo estas cosas, y se alejó y se escondió de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{12:36}
  Efes 5,9}

\hypertarget{la-revisiuxf3n-del-evangelista-de-la-actividad-puxfablica-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{La revisión del evangelista de la actividad pública de
Jesús}\label{la-revisiuxf3n-del-evangelista-de-la-actividad-puxfablica-de-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{37} Pero aunque había hecho tantas señales delante de ellos,
no creían en él, \bibleverse{38} para que se cumpliera la palabra del
profeta Isaías que había dicho: ``Señor, ¿quién ha creído en nuestro
informe? ¿A quién se le ha revelado el brazo del Señor?'' \footnote{\textbf{12:38}
  Isaías 53:1}

\bibleverse{39} Por eso no podían creer, pues Isaías volvió a decir
\bibleverse{40} ``Ha cegado sus ojos y ha endurecido su corazón, para
que no vean con sus ojos, y entiendan con el corazón, y se conviertan, y
yo los sane\footnote{\textbf{12:40} Isaías 6:10} ''. \footnote{\textbf{12:40}
  Mat 13,14-15}

\bibleverse{41} Isaías dijo estas cosas al ver su gloria, y habló de él.
\footnote{\textbf{12:41} Isaías 6:1} \footnote{\textbf{12:41} Is 6,1}
\bibleverse{42} Sin embargo, incluso muchos de los gobernantes creyeron
en él, pero a causa de los fariseos no lo confesaron, para no ser
expulsados de la sinagoga, \footnote{\textbf{12:42} Juan 9,22}
\bibleverse{43} porque amaban más la alabanza de los hombres que la de
Dios. \footnote{\textbf{12:43} Juan 5,44}

\hypertarget{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-sobre-suxed-mismo-y-sobre-su-relaciuxf3n-con-dios}{%
\subsection{El testimonio de Jesús sobre sí mismo y sobre su relación
con
Dios}\label{el-testimonio-de-jesuxfas-sobre-suxed-mismo-y-sobre-su-relaciuxf3n-con-dios}}

\bibleverse{44} Jesús clamó y dijo: ``El que cree en mí, no cree en mí,
sino en el que me ha enviado. \bibleverse{45} El que me ve, ve al que me
ha enviado. \footnote{\textbf{12:45} Juan 14,9} \bibleverse{46} Yo he
venido al mundo como una luz, para que quien crea en mí no permanezca en
las tinieblas. \bibleverse{47} Si alguien escucha mis palabras y no
cree, yo no lo juzgo. Porque no he venido a juzgar al mundo, sino a
salvar al mundo. \footnote{\textbf{12:47} Juan 3,17; Luc 9,56}
\bibleverse{48} El que me rechaza y no recibe mis palabras, tiene quien
lo juzgue. La palabra que yo hablé lo juzgará en el último día.
\bibleverse{49} Porque no he hablado por mí mismo, sino que el Padre que
me ha enviado me ha dado un mandamiento sobre lo que debo decir y lo que
debo hablar. \bibleverse{50} Yosé que su mandamiento es la vida eterna.
Por lo tanto, las cosas que hablo, como el Padre me ha dicho, así las
hablo''.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to
Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he raised from the
dead. \bibleverse{2} So they made him a supper there. Martha served, but
Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him. \bibleverse{3}
Therefore Mary took a pound\footnote{\textbf{12:3} a Roman pound of 12
  ounces, or about 340 grams} of ointment of pure nard, very precious,
and anointed Jesus's feet and wiped his feet with her hair. The house
was filled with the fragrance of the ointment.

\bibleverse{4} Then Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, one of his disciples,
who would betray him, said, \bibleverse{5} ``Why wasn't this ointment
sold for three hundred denarii\footnote{\textbf{12:5} 300 denarii was
  about a year's wages for an agricultural laborer.} and given to the
poor?'' \bibleverse{6} Now he said this, not because he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, used to
steal what was put into it.

\bibleverse{7} But Jesus said, ``Leave her alone. She has kept this for
the day of my burial. \bibleverse{8} For you always have the poor with
you, but you don't always have me.''

\bibleverse{9} A large crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was
there; and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see
Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead. \bibleverse{10} But the
chief priests conspired to put Lazarus to death also, \bibleverse{11}
because on account of him many of the Jews went away and believed in
Jesus.

\bibleverse{12} On the next day a great multitude had come to the feast.
When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, \bibleverse{13} they
took the branches of the palm trees and went out to meet him, and cried
out, ``Hosanna!\footnote{\textbf{12:13} ``Hosanna'' means ``save us'' or
  ``help us, we pray''.} Blessed is he who comes in the name of the
Lord,\footnote{\textbf{12:13} Psalm 118:25-26} the King of Israel!''

\bibleverse{14} Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it. As it is
written, \bibleverse{15} ``Don't be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold,
your King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt.''\footnote{\textbf{12:15}
  Zechariah 9:9} \bibleverse{16} His disciples didn't understand these
things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that
these things were written about him, and that they had done these things
to him. \bibleverse{17} The multitude therefore that was with him when
he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead was
testifying about it. \bibleverse{18} For this cause also the multitude
went and met him, because they heard that he had done this sign.
\bibleverse{19} The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, ``See how
you accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him.''

\bibleverse{20} Now there were certain Greeks among those who went up to
worship at the feast. \bibleverse{21} Therefore, these came to Philip,
who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, ``Sir, we want
to see Jesus.'' \bibleverse{22} Philip came and told Andrew, and in
turn, Andrew came with Philip, and they told Jesus.

\bibleverse{23} Jesus answered them, ``The time has come for the Son of
Man to be glorified. \bibleverse{24} Most certainly I tell you, unless a
grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains by itself
alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit. \bibleverse{25} He who loves
his life will lose it. He who hates his life in this world will keep it
to eternal life. \bibleverse{26} If anyone serves me, let him follow me.
Where I am, there my servant will also be. If anyone serves me, the
Father will honor him.

\bibleverse{27} ``Now my soul is troubled. What shall I say? `Father,
save me from this time?' But I came to this time for this cause.
\bibleverse{28} Father, glorify your name!''

Then a voice came out of the sky, saying, ``I have both glorified it and
will glorify it again.''

\bibleverse{29} Therefore the multitude who stood by and heard it said
that it had thundered. Others said, ``An angel has spoken to him.''

\bibleverse{30} Jesus answered, ``This voice hasn't come for my sake,
but for your sakes. \bibleverse{31} Now is the judgment of this world.
Now the prince of this world will be cast out. \bibleverse{32} And I, if
I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.''
\bibleverse{33} But he said this, signifying by what kind of death he
should die.

\bibleverse{34} The multitude answered him, ``We have heard out of the
law that the Christ remains forever.\footnote{\textbf{12:34} Isaiah 9:7;
  Daniel 2:44; See Isaiah 53:8} How do you say, `The Son of Man must be
lifted up?' Who is this Son of Man?''

\bibleverse{35} Jesus therefore said to them, ``Yet a little while the
light is with you. Walk while you have the light, that darkness doesn't
overtake you. He who walks in the darkness doesn't know where he is
going. \bibleverse{36} While you have the light, believe in the light,
that you may become children of light.'' Jesus said these things, and he
departed and hid himself from them. \bibleverse{37} But though he had
done so many signs before them, yet they didn't believe in him,
\bibleverse{38} that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled,
which he spoke: ``Lord, who has believed our report? To whom has the arm
of the Lord been revealed?''\footnote{\textbf{12:38} Isaiah 53:1}

\bibleverse{39} For this cause they couldn't believe, for Isaiah said
again: \bibleverse{40} ``He has blinded their eyes and he hardened their
heart, lest they should see with their eyes, and perceive with their
heart, and would turn, and I would heal them.''\footnote{\textbf{12:40}
  Isaiah 6:10}

\bibleverse{41} Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory, and
spoke of him. \footnote{\textbf{12:41} Isaiah 6:1} \bibleverse{42}
Nevertheless, even many of the rulers believed in him, but because of
the Pharisees they didn't confess it, so that they wouldn't be put out
of the synagogue, \bibleverse{43} for they loved men's praise more than
God's praise.

\bibleverse{44} Jesus cried out and said, ``Whoever believes in me,
believes not in me, but in him who sent me. \bibleverse{45} He who sees
me sees him who sent me. \bibleverse{46} I have come as a light into the
world, that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness.
\bibleverse{47} If anyone listens to my sayings and doesn't believe, I
don't judge him. For I came not to judge the world, but to save the
world. \bibleverse{48} He who rejects me, and doesn't receive my
sayings, has one who judges him. The word that I spoke will judge him in
the last day. \bibleverse{49} For I spoke not from myself, but the
Father who sent me gave me a commandment, what I should say and what I
should speak. \bibleverse{50} I know that his commandment is eternal
life. The things therefore which I speak, even as the Father has said to
me, so I speak.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-lavado-de-pies}{%
\subsection{El lavado de pies}\label{el-lavado-de-pies}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{13}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Antes de la fiesta de la Pascua, Jesús, sabiendo que
había llegado su hora de pasar de este mundo al Padre, habiendo amado a
los suyos que estaban en el mundo, los amó hasta el fin. \footnote{\textbf{13:1}
  Juan 7,30; Juan 17,1} \bibleverse{2} Durante la cena, habiendo metido
ya el diablo en el corazón de Judas Iscariote, hijo de Simón, para que
lo traicionara, \footnote{\textbf{13:2} Luc 22,3} \bibleverse{3} Jesús,
sabiendo que el Padre había entregado todas las cosas en sus manos, y
que venía de Dios y se iba a Dios, \footnote{\textbf{13:3} Juan 3,35;
  Juan 16,28} \bibleverse{4} se levantó de la cena y se despojó de sus
vestidos exteriores. Tomó una toalla y se la puso alrededor de la
cintura. \bibleverse{5} Luego echó agua en un lebrillo y se puso a lavar
los pies de los discípulos y a enjugarlos con la toalla que le envolvía.
\bibleverse{6} Luego se acercó a Simón Pedro. Le dijo: ``Señor, ¿me
lavas los pies?''.

\bibleverse{7} Jesús le contestó: ``No sabes lo que hago ahora, pero lo
entenderás después''.

\bibleverse{8} Pedro le dijo: ``¡Nunca me lavarás los pies!'' Jesús le
respondió: ``Si no te lavo, no tienes parte conmigo''.

\bibleverse{9} Simón Pedro le dijo: ``Señor, no sólo mis pies, sino
también mis manos y mi cabeza''.

\bibleverse{10} Jesús le dijo: ``Alguien que se ha bañado sólo necesita
que le laven los pies, pero está completamente limpio. Vosotros estáis
limpios, pero no todos''. \footnote{\textbf{13:10} Juan 15,3}
\bibleverse{11} Porque conocía al que lo iba a traicionar; por eso dijo:
``No estáis todos limpios''.

\hypertarget{la-interpretaciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-de-su-humilde-servicio-de-amor}{%
\subsection{La interpretación de Jesús de su humilde servicio de
amor}\label{la-interpretaciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-de-su-humilde-servicio-de-amor}}

\bibleverse{12} Así que, después de lavarles los pies, volver a ponerse
la ropa exterior y sentarse de nuevo, les dijo: ``¿Sabéis lo que os he
hecho? \bibleverse{13} Me llamáis ``Maestro'' y ``Señor''. Lo decís con
razón, porque así soy. \footnote{\textbf{13:13} Mat 23,8; Mat 23,10}
\bibleverse{14} Si yo, el Señor y el Maestro, os he lavado los pies,
también vosotros debéis lavaros los pies unos a otros. \footnote{\textbf{13:14}
  Luc 22,27} \bibleverse{15} Porque os he dado ejemplo, para que también
vosotros hagáis lo que yo he hecho con vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{13:15}
  Fil 2,5; 1Pe 2,21} \bibleverse{16} De cierto os digo que el siervo no
es mayor que su señor, ni el enviado es mayor que el que lo envió.
\footnote{\textbf{13:16} Mat 10,24} \bibleverse{17} Si sabéis estas
cosas, dichosos vosotros si las ponéis en práctica. \footnote{\textbf{13:17}
  Mat 7,24} \bibleverse{18} No hablo de todos vosotros. Yo sé a quién he
escogido; pero para que se cumpla la Escritura: `El que come pan
conmigo, ha levantado su talón contra mí'. \footnote{\textbf{13:18}
  Salmo 41:9} \bibleverse{19} Desde ahora os lo digo antes de que
ocurra, para que cuando ocurra, creáis que yo soy. \bibleverse{20} De
cierto os digo que el que recibe a quien yo envío, me recibe a mí; y el
que me recibe a mí, recibe al que me envió.'' \footnote{\textbf{13:20}
  Mat 10,40}

\hypertarget{identificaciuxf3n-y-remociuxf3n-del-traidor}{%
\subsection{Identificación y remoción del
traidor}\label{identificaciuxf3n-y-remociuxf3n-del-traidor}}

\bibleverse{21} Al decir esto, Jesús se turbó en su espíritu y declaró:
``Os aseguro que uno de vosotros me va a traicionar.'' \footnote{\textbf{13:21}
  Juan 12,27}

\bibleverse{22} Los discípulos se miraban unos a otros, perplejos sobre
quién hablaba. \bibleverse{23} Uno de sus discípulos, a quien Jesús
amaba, estaba en la mesa, apoyado en el pecho de Jesús. \footnote{\textbf{13:23}
  Juan 19,26; Juan 20,2; Juan 21,20} \bibleverse{24} Entonces Simón
Pedro le hizo señas y le dijo: ``Dinos de quién habla''.

\bibleverse{25} Él, recostado, como estaba, sobre el pecho de Jesús, le
preguntó: ``Señor, ¿quién es?''.

\bibleverse{26} Entonces Jesús respondió: ``Es a quien le daré este
pedazo de pan cuando lo haya mojado''. Y cuando hubo mojado el pedazo de
pan, se lo dio a Judas, hijo de Simón Iscariote. \bibleverse{27} Después
del trozo de pan, entró en él Satanás. Entonces Jesús le dijo: ``Lo que
hagas, hazlo rápido''.

\bibleverse{28} Nadie en la mesa sabía por qué le decía esto.
\bibleverse{29} Pues algunos pensaron, porque Judas tenía la bolsa, que
Jesús le había dicho: ``Compra lo que necesitamos para la fiesta'', o
que debía dar algo a los pobres. \bibleverse{30} Así que, habiendo
recibido aquel bocado, salió inmediatamente. Era de noche.

\hypertarget{el-anuncio-de-jesuxfas-de-su-glorificaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{El anuncio de Jesús de su
glorificación}\label{el-anuncio-de-jesuxfas-de-su-glorificaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{31} Cuando salió, Jesús dijo: ``Ahora el Hijo del Hombre ha
sido glorificado, y Dios ha sido glorificado en él. \footnote{\textbf{13:31}
  Juan 12,23; Juan 12,28} \bibleverse{32} Si Dios ha sido glorificado en
él, Dios también lo glorificará en sí mismo, y lo glorificará
inmediatamente. \footnote{\textbf{13:32} Juan 17,1-5} \bibleverse{33}
Hijitos, estaré con vosotros un poco más de tiempo. Me buscaréis, y como
dije a los judíos: ``Donde yo voy, vosotros no podéis venir'', así os lo
digo ahora. \footnote{\textbf{13:33} Juan 9,21}

\hypertarget{el-nuevo-mandamiento-de-amar}{%
\subsection{El nuevo mandamiento de
amar}\label{el-nuevo-mandamiento-de-amar}}

\bibleverse{34} Un nuevo mandamiento os doy: que os améis unos a otros.
Como yo os he amado, amaos también vosotros unos a otros. \footnote{\textbf{13:34}
  Juan 15,12-13; Juan 15,17} \bibleverse{35} En esto reconocerán todos
que sois mis discípulos, si os amáis unos a otros.''

\hypertarget{anuncio-de-la-negaciuxf3n-de-pedro}{%
\subsection{Anuncio de la negación de
Pedro}\label{anuncio-de-la-negaciuxf3n-de-pedro}}

\bibleverse{36} Simón Pedro le dijo: ``Señor, ¿a dónde vas?''. Jesús
respondió: ``A donde voy, no puedes seguirme ahora, pero me seguirás
después''. \footnote{\textbf{13:36} Juan 21,18-19}

\bibleverse{37} Pedro le dijo: ``Señor, ¿por qué no puedo seguirte
ahora? Daré mi vida por ti''.

\bibleverse{38} Jesús le contestó: ``¿Vas a dar tu vida por mí? Te
aseguro que el gallo no cantará hasta que me hayas negado tres veces.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{13}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, knowing that
his time had come that he would depart from this world to the Father,
having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
\bibleverse{2} During supper, the devil having already put into the
heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him, \bibleverse{3}
Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and
that he came from God and was going to God, \bibleverse{4} arose from
supper, and laid aside his outer garments. He took a towel and wrapped a
towel around his waist. \bibleverse{5} Then he poured water into the
basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet and to wipe them with the
towel that was wrapped around him. \bibleverse{6} Then he came to Simon
Peter. He said to him, ``Lord, do you wash my feet?''

\bibleverse{7} Jesus answered him, ``You don't know what I am doing now,
but you will understand later.''

\bibleverse{8} Peter said to him, ``You will never wash my feet!''

Jesus answered him, ``If I don't wash you, you have no part with me.''

\bibleverse{9} Simon Peter said to him, ``Lord, not my feet only, but
also my hands and my head!''

\bibleverse{10} Jesus said to him, ``Someone who has bathed only needs
to have his feet washed, but is completely clean. You are clean, but not
all of you.'' \bibleverse{11} For he knew him who would betray him;
therefore he said, ``You are not all clean.'' \bibleverse{12} So when he
had washed their feet, put his outer garment back on, and sat down
again, he said to them, ``Do you know what I have done to you?
\bibleverse{13} You call me, `Teacher' and `Lord.' You say so correctly,
for so I am. \bibleverse{14} If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have
washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.
\bibleverse{15} For I have given you an example, that you should also do
as I have done to you. \bibleverse{16} Most certainly I tell you, a
servant is not greater than his lord, neither is one who is sent greater
than he who sent him. \bibleverse{17} If you know these things, blessed
are you if you do them. \bibleverse{18} I don't speak concerning all of
you. I know whom I have chosen; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled,
`He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against
me.'\footnote{\textbf{13:18} Psalm 41:9} \bibleverse{19} From now on, I
tell you before it happens, that when it happens, you may believe that I
am he. \bibleverse{20} Most certainly I tell you, he who receives
whomever I send, receives me; and he who receives me, receives him who
sent me.''

\bibleverse{21} When Jesus had said this, he was troubled in spirit, and
testified, ``Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me.''

\bibleverse{22} The disciples looked at one another, perplexed about
whom he spoke. \bibleverse{23} One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved,
was at the table, leaning against Jesus' breast. \bibleverse{24} Simon
Peter therefore beckoned to him, and said to him, ``Tell us who it is of
whom he speaks.''

\bibleverse{25} He, leaning back, as he was, on Jesus' breast, asked
him, ``Lord, who is it?''

\bibleverse{26} Jesus therefore answered, ``It is he to whom I will give
this piece of bread when I have dipped it.'' So when he had dipped the
piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
\bibleverse{27} After the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him.

Then Jesus said to him, ``What you do, do quickly.''

\bibleverse{28} Now nobody at the table knew why he said this to him.
\bibleverse{29} For some thought, because Judas had the money box, that
Jesus said to him, ``Buy what things we need for the feast,'' or that he
should give something to the poor. \bibleverse{30} Therefore having
received that morsel, he went out immediately. It was night.

\bibleverse{31} When he had gone out, Jesus said, ``Now the Son of Man
has been glorified, and God has been glorified in him. \bibleverse{32}
If God has been glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself,
and he will glorify him immediately. \bibleverse{33} Little children, I
will be with you a little while longer. You will seek me, and as I said
to the Jews, `Where I am going, you can't come,' so now I tell you.
\bibleverse{34} A new commandment I give to you, that you love one
another. Just as I have loved you, you also love one another.
\bibleverse{35} By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if
you have love for one another.''

\bibleverse{36} Simon Peter said to him, ``Lord, where are you going?''

Jesus answered, ``Where I am going, you can't follow now, but you will
follow afterwards.''

\bibleverse{37} Peter said to him, ``Lord, why can't I follow you now? I
will lay down my life for you.''

\bibleverse{38} Jesus answered him, ``Will you lay down your life for
me? Most certainly I tell you, the rooster won't crow until you have
denied me three times.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-el-camino-a-dios-su-uniuxf3n-con-dios}{%
\subsection{Jesús el camino a Dios, su unión con
Dios}\label{jesuxfas-el-camino-a-dios-su-uniuxf3n-con-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{14}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} ``No dejes que tu corazón se turbe. Creéis en Dios. Creed
también en mí. \bibleverse{2} En la casa de mi Padre hay muchas casas.
Si no fuera así, os lo habría dicho. Voy a preparar un lugar para
vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{14:2} Mat 25,34} \bibleverse{3} Si me voy y
os preparo un lugar, volveré y os recibiré en mi casa; para que donde yo
esté, estéis también vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{14:3} Juan 12,26; Juan
  17,24} \bibleverse{4} Vosotros sabéis a dónde voy y conocéis el
camino''.

\bibleverse{5} Tomás le dijo: ``Señor, no sabemos a dónde vas. ¿Cómo
podemos saber el camino?''

\bibleverse{6} Jesús le dijo: ``Yo soy el camino, la verdad y la vida.
Nadie viene al Padre sino por mí. \footnote{\textbf{14:6} Heb 10,20; Mat
  11,27; Juan 10,9; Rom 5,1-2} \bibleverse{7} Si me hubieras conocido,
habrías conocido también a mi Padre. Desde ahora, lo conoces y lo has
visto''.

\bibleverse{8} Felipe le dijo: ``Señor, muéstranos al Padre, y eso nos
bastará''.

\bibleverse{9} Jesús le dijo: ``¿Tanto tiempo llevo con vosotros y no me
conoces, Felipe? El que me ha visto a mí ha visto al Padre. ¿Cómo dices:
``Muéstranos al Padre''? \footnote{\textbf{14:9} Juan 12,45; Heb 1,3}
\bibleverse{10} ¿No crees que yo estoy en el Padre y el Padre en mí? Las
palabras que os digo no las hablo por mí mismo, sino que el Padre que
vive en mí hace sus obras. \footnote{\textbf{14:10} Juan 12,49}
\bibleverse{11} Creedme que yo estoy en el Padre, y el Padre en mí; o
bien creedme por las mismas obras. \footnote{\textbf{14:11} Juan 10,25;
  Juan 10,38}

\hypertarget{promesa-del-espuxedritu-santo}{%
\subsection{Promesa del Espíritu
Santo}\label{promesa-del-espuxedritu-santo}}

\bibleverse{12} De cierto os digo que el que cree en mí, las obras que
yo hago, él también las hará; y hará obras mayores que éstas, porque yo
voy a mi Padre. \footnote{\textbf{14:12} Mat 28,19} \bibleverse{13} Todo
lo que pidáis en mi nombre, lo haré, para que el Padre sea glorificado
en el Hijo. \footnote{\textbf{14:13} Juan 15,7; Juan 16,24; Mar 11,24;
  1Jn 5,14; 1Jn 1,5-15} \bibleverse{14} Si pedís algo en mi nombre, yo
lo haré. \bibleverse{15} Si me amáis, guardad mis mandamientos.
\footnote{\textbf{14:15} Juan 15,10; 1Jn 5,3} \bibleverse{16} Yo rogaré
al Padre, y él os dará otro Consejero, para\footnote{\textbf{14:16}
  Griego \greek{παρακλητον}: Consejero, Ayudante, Intercesor, Abogado y
  Consolador.} que esté con vosotros para siempre: \footnote{\textbf{14:16}
  Juan 15,26; Juan 16,7} \bibleverse{17} el Espíritu de la verdad, al
que el mundo no puede recibir, porque no lo ve y no lo conoce. Vosotros
lo conocéis, porque vive con vosotros y estará en vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{14:17}
  Juan 16,13} \bibleverse{18} No os dejaré huérfanos. Vendré a vosotros.
\bibleverse{19} Todavía un poco, y el mundo no me verá más; pero
vosotros me veréis. Porque yo vivo, vosotros también viviréis.
\footnote{\textbf{14:19} Juan 20,20} \bibleverse{20} En aquel día
sabréis que yo estoy en mi Padre, y vosotros en mí, y yo en vosotros.

\hypertarget{promesa-de-la-muxe1s-uxedntima-comunidad-de-espuxedritu-y-amor-con-dios-y-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Promesa de la más íntima comunidad de espíritu y amor con
Dios y
Jesús}\label{promesa-de-la-muxe1s-uxedntima-comunidad-de-espuxedritu-y-amor-con-dios-y-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{21} El que tiene mis mandamientos y los cumple, ése es el
que me ama. El que me ama será amado por mi Padre, y yo le amaré y me
revelaré a él''. \footnote{\textbf{14:21} Juan 16,27; 1Jn 5,3}

\bibleverse{22} Judas (no Iscariote) le dijo: ``Señor, ¿qué ha pasado
para que te reveles a nosotros y no al mundo?'' \footnote{\textbf{14:22}
  Hech 10,40-41}

\bibleverse{23} Jesús le respondió: ``Si un hombre me ama, cumplirá mi
palabra. Mi Padre lo amará, y vendremos a él y haremos nuestra casa con
él. \footnote{\textbf{14:23} Prov 8,17; Efes 3,17} \bibleverse{24} El
que no me ama no guarda mis palabras. La palabra que oís no es mía, sino
del Padre que me ha enviado. \footnote{\textbf{14:24} Juan 7,16-17}

\hypertarget{promesa-de-enseuxf1ar-del-espuxedritu-santo}{%
\subsection{Promesa de enseñar del Espíritu
Santo}\label{promesa-de-enseuxf1ar-del-espuxedritu-santo}}

\bibleverse{25} ``Os he dicho estas cosas mientras vivía con vosotros.
\bibleverse{26} Pero el Consejero, el Espíritu Santo, que el Padre
enviará en mi nombre, os enseñará todas las cosas y os recordará todo lo
que os he dicho. \bibleverse{27} La paz os dejo. Mi paz os doy; no os la
doy como la da el mundo. No dejes que tu corazón se turbe, ni que tenga
miedo. \footnote{\textbf{14:27} Juan 16,33; Fil 4,7} \bibleverse{28}
Habéis oído que os dije: ``Me voy y volveré a vosotros''. Si me amarais,
os habríais alegrado porque dije: ``Me voy a mi Padre'', porque el Padre
es más grande que yo. \bibleverse{29} Ahora os lo he dicho antes de que
ocurra, para que, cuando ocurra, creáis. \bibleverse{30} Ya no hablaré
mucho con vosotros, porque viene el príncipe de este mundo y no tiene
nada en mí. \footnote{\textbf{14:30} Juan 12,31; Efes 2,2}
\bibleverse{31} Pero para que el mundo sepa que amo al Padre, y que como
el Padre me mandó, así hago yo. Levantaos, vámonos de aquí. \footnote{\textbf{14:31}
  Juan 10,18}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{14}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Don't let your heart be troubled. Believe in God.
Believe also in me. \bibleverse{2} In my Father's house are many homes.
If it weren't so, I would have told you. I am going to prepare a place
for you. \bibleverse{3} If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you may be there
also. \bibleverse{4} You know where I go, and you know the way.''

\bibleverse{5} Thomas said to him, ``Lord, we don't know where you are
going. How can we know the way?''

\bibleverse{6} Jesus said to him, ``I am the way, the truth, and the
life. No one comes to the Father, except through me. \bibleverse{7} If
you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on, you
know him and have seen him.''

\bibleverse{8} Philip said to him, ``Lord, show us the Father, and that
will be enough for us.''

\bibleverse{9} Jesus said to him, ``Have I been with you such a long
time, and do you not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the
Father. How do you say, `Show us the Father?' \bibleverse{10} Don't you
believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I
tell you, I speak not from myself; but the Father who lives in me does
his works. \bibleverse{11} Believe me that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me; or else believe me for the very works' sake.
\bibleverse{12} Most certainly I tell you, he who believes in me, the
works that I do, he will do also; and he will do greater works than
these, because I am going to my Father. \bibleverse{13} Whatever you
will ask in my name, I will do it, that the Father may be glorified in
the Son. \bibleverse{14} If you will ask anything in my name, I will do
it. \bibleverse{15} If you love me, keep my commandments.
\bibleverse{16} I will pray to the Father, and he will give you another
Counselor, \footnote{\textbf{14:16} Greek \greek{παρακλητον}: Counselor,
  Helper, Intercessor, Advocate, and Comforter.} that he may be with you
forever: \bibleverse{17} the Spirit of truth, whom the world can't
receive, for it doesn't see him and doesn't know him. You know him, for
he lives with you and will be in you. \bibleverse{18} I will not leave
you orphans. I will come to you. \bibleverse{19} Yet a little while, and
the world will see me no more; but you will see me. Because I live, you
will live also. \bibleverse{20} In that day you will know that I am in
my Father, and you in me, and I in you. \bibleverse{21} One who has my
commandments and keeps them, that person is one who loves me. One who
loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will
reveal myself to him.''

\bibleverse{22} Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, ``Lord, what has
happened that you are about to reveal yourself to us, and not to the
world?''

\bibleverse{23} Jesus answered him, ``If a man loves me, he will keep my
word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home
with him. \bibleverse{24} He who doesn't love me doesn't keep my words.
The word which you hear isn't mine, but the Father's who sent me.

\bibleverse{25} ``I have said these things to you while still living
with you. \bibleverse{26} But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my name, will teach you all things, and will remind
you of all that I said to you. \bibleverse{27} Peace I leave with you.
My peace I give to you; not as the world gives, I give to you. Don't let
your heart be troubled, neither let it be fearful. \bibleverse{28} You
heard how I told you, `I am going away, and I will come back to you.' If
you loved me, you would have rejoiced because I said `I am going to my
Father;' for the Father is greater than I. \bibleverse{29} Now I have
told you before it happens so that when it happens, you may believe.
\bibleverse{30} I will no more speak much with you, for the prince of
the world comes, and he has nothing in me. \bibleverse{31} But that the
world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father commanded me,
even so I do. Arise, let's go from here.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{paruxe1bola-de-la-vid-y-las-ramas}{%
\subsection{Parábola de la vid y las
ramas}\label{paruxe1bola-de-la-vid-y-las-ramas}}

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{15}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Yo soy la verdadera vid, y mi Padre es el viticultor.
\bibleverse{2} Todo sarmiento que en mí no da fruto, lo quita. Todo
sarmiento que da fruto, lo poda para que dé más fruto. \bibleverse{3}
Vosotros ya estáis limpios por la palabra que os he dicho. \footnote{\textbf{15:3}
  Juan 13,10; 1Pe 1,23} \bibleverse{4} Permaneced en mí, y yo en
vosotros. Como el sarmiento no puede dar fruto por sí mismo si no
permanece en la vid, así tampoco vosotros, si no permanecéis en mí.
\bibleverse{5} Yo soy la vid. Vosotros sois los sarmientos. El que
permanece en mí y yo en él da mucho fruto, porque sin mí no podéis hacer
nada. \footnote{\textbf{15:5} 2Cor 3,5-6} \bibleverse{6} El que no
permanece en mí, es arrojado como pámpano y se seca; los recogen, los
echan al fuego y se queman. \bibleverse{7} Si permanecéis en mí, y mis
palabras permanecen en vosotros, pediréis todo lo que queráis, y se os
hará. \footnote{\textbf{15:7} Mar 11,24}

\bibleverse{8} ``En esto es glorificado mi Padre, en que deis mucho
fruto; y así seréis mis discípulos. \footnote{\textbf{15:8} Mat 5,16}

\hypertarget{el-mandamiento-del-amor-permanezcan-en-la-comunidad-de-amor-conmigo-y-entre-nosotros}{%
\subsection{El mandamiento del amor: ¡Permanezcan en la comunidad de
amor conmigo y entre
nosotros!}\label{el-mandamiento-del-amor-permanezcan-en-la-comunidad-de-amor-conmigo-y-entre-nosotros}}

\bibleverse{9} Como el Padre me ha amado, yo también os he amado.
Permaneced en mi amor. \bibleverse{10} Si guardáis mis mandamientos,
permaneceréis en mi amor, como yo he guardado los mandamientos de mi
Padre y permanezco en su amor. \bibleverse{11} Os he dicho estas cosas
para que mi alegría permanezca en vosotros y vuestra alegría sea
cumplida. \footnote{\textbf{15:11} Juan 17,13}

\bibleverse{12} ``Este es mi mandamiento: que os améis unos a otros,
como yo os he amado. \footnote{\textbf{15:12} Juan 13,34}
\bibleverse{13} Nadie tiene mayor amor que el que da la vida por sus
amigos. \footnote{\textbf{15:13} Juan 10,12; 1Jn 3,16} \bibleverse{14}
Vosotros sois mis amigos si hacéis lo que yo os mando. \footnote{\textbf{15:14}
  Juan 8,31; Mat 12,50} \bibleverse{15} Ya no os llamo siervos, porque
el siervo no sabe lo que hace su señor. Pero os he llamado amigos,
porque todo lo que he oído a mi Padre os lo he dado a conocer.
\bibleverse{16} No me habéis elegido a mí, sino que yo os he elegido a
vosotros y os he designado para que vayáis y deis fruto, y vuestro fruto
permanezca; para que todo lo que pidáis al Padre en mi nombre os lo dé.

\bibleverse{17} ``Os mando estas cosas, para que os améis unos a otros.

\hypertarget{profecuxeda-del-destino-de-los-discuxedpulos-sufriendo-el-odio-del-mundo}{%
\subsection{Profecía del destino de los discípulos, sufriendo el odio
del
mundo}\label{profecuxeda-del-destino-de-los-discuxedpulos-sufriendo-el-odio-del-mundo}}

\bibleverse{18} Si el mundo os odia, sabed que me ha odiado a mí antes
que a vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{15:18} Juan 7,7} \bibleverse{19} Si
fuerais del mundo, el mundo amaría a los suyos. Pero como no sois del
mundo, puesto que yo os elegí del mundo, por eso el mundo os odia.
\footnote{\textbf{15:19} 1Jn 4,4; 1Jn 1,4-5; Juan 17,14} \bibleverse{20}
Recordad la palabra que os dije: `Un siervo no es mayor que su
señor'.\footnote{\textbf{15:20} Juan 13:16} Si me persiguieron a mí,
también os perseguirán a vosotros. Si ellos cumplieron mi palabra,
también cumplirán la vuestra. \footnote{\textbf{15:20} Juan 13,16; Mat
  10,24-25} \bibleverse{21} Pero todo esto os lo harán por mi nombre,
porque no conocen al que me ha enviado. \footnote{\textbf{15:21} Juan
  16,3} \bibleverse{22} Si yo no hubiera venido a hablarles, no tendrían
pecado; pero ahora no tienen excusa para su pecado. \footnote{\textbf{15:22}
  Juan 9,41} \bibleverse{23} El que me odia, odia también a mi Padre.
\footnote{\textbf{15:23} Luc 10,16} \bibleverse{24} Si yo no hubiera
hecho entre ellos las obras que nadie hizo, no tendrían pecado. Pero
ahora han visto y también me han odiado a mí y a mi Padre.
\bibleverse{25} Pero esto ha sucedido para que se cumpla la palabra que
estaba escrita en su ley: ``Me odiaron sin causa''. \footnote{\textbf{15:25}
  Salmo 35:19; 69:4}

\bibleverse{26} ``Cuando venga el Consejero\footnote{\textbf{15:26}
  Parakletos griego: Consejero, Ayudante, Abogado, Intercesor y
  Consolador.} que os enviaré de parte del Padre, el Espíritu de la
verdad, que procede del Padre, él dará testimonio de mí. \footnote{\textbf{15:26}
  Juan 14,16; Juan 14,26; Luc 24,49} \bibleverse{27} También
vosotrosdaréis testimonio, porque habéis estado conmigo desde el
principio. \footnote{\textbf{15:27} Hech 1,8; Hech 1,21-22; Hech 5,32}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{15}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} ``I am the true vine, and my Father is the farmer.
\bibleverse{2} Every branch in me that doesn't bear fruit, he takes
away. Every branch that bears fruit, he prunes, that it may bear more
fruit. \bibleverse{3} You are already pruned clean because of the word
which I have spoken to you. \bibleverse{4} Remain in me, and I in you.
As the branch can't bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine,
so neither can you, unless you remain in me. \bibleverse{5} I am the
vine. You are the branches. He who remains in me and I in him bears much
fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing. \bibleverse{6} If a man
doesn't remain in me, he is thrown out as a branch and is withered; and
they gather them, throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
\bibleverse{7} If you remain in me, and my words remain in you, you will
ask whatever you desire, and it will be done for you.

\bibleverse{8} ``In this my Father is glorified, that you bear much
fruit; and so you will be my disciples. \bibleverse{9} Even as the
Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Remain in my love.
\bibleverse{10} If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love,
even as I have kept my Father's commandments and remain in his love.
\bibleverse{11} I have spoken these things to you, that my joy may
remain in you, and that your joy may be made full.

\bibleverse{12} ``This is my commandment, that you love one another,
even as I have loved you. \bibleverse{13} Greater love has no one than
this, that someone lay down his life for his friends. \bibleverse{14}
You are my friends if you do whatever I command you. \bibleverse{15} No
longer do I call you servants, for the servant doesn't know what his
lord does. But I have called you friends, for everything that I heard
from my Father, I have made known to you. \bibleverse{16} You didn't
choose me, but I chose you and appointed you, that you should go and
bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that whatever you will
ask of the Father in my name, he may give it to you.

\bibleverse{17} ``I command these things to you, that you may love one
another. \bibleverse{18} If the world hates you, you know that it has
hated me before it hated you. \bibleverse{19} If you were of the world,
the world would love its own. But because you are not of the world,
since I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
\bibleverse{20} Remember the word that I said to you: `A servant is not
greater than his lord.'\footnote{\textbf{15:20} John 13:16} If they
persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they
will also keep yours. \bibleverse{21} But they will do all these things
to you for my name's sake, because they don't know him who sent me.
\bibleverse{22} If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not
have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin. \bibleverse{23}
He who hates me, hates my Father also. \bibleverse{24} If I hadn't done
among them the works which no one else did, they wouldn't have had sin.
But now they have seen and also hated both me and my Father.
\bibleverse{25} But this happened so that the word may be fulfilled
which was written in their law, `They hated me without a
cause.'\footnote{\textbf{15:25} Psalm 35:19; 69:4}

\bibleverse{26} ``When the Counselor\footnote{\textbf{15:26} Greek
  Parakletos: Counselor, Helper, Advocate, Intercessor, and Comforter.}
has come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth,
who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about me. \bibleverse{27}
You will also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{16}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Os he dicho estas cosas para no haceros tropezar.
\bibleverse{2} Os expulsarán de las sinagogas. Sí, viene el tiempo en
que quien os mate pensará que ofrece un servicio a Dios. \footnote{\textbf{16:2}
  Mat 10,17; Mat 10,22; Mat 24,9} \bibleverse{3} Ellos harán estas cosas
\footnote{\textbf{16:3} TR añade ``a ti''} porque no han conocido al
Padre ni a mí. \footnote{\textbf{16:3} Juan 15,21} \bibleverse{4} Pero
os he dicho estas cosas para que, cuando llegue el momento, os acordéis
de que os las he contado. No os dije estas cosas desde el principio,
porque estaba con vosotros.

\hypertarget{promesa-del-espuxedritu-santo-y-su-obra-benuxe9fica-en-el-mundo-y-en-los-discuxedpulos}{%
\subsection{Promesa del Espíritu Santo y su obra benéfica en el mundo y
en los
discípulos}\label{promesa-del-espuxedritu-santo-y-su-obra-benuxe9fica-en-el-mundo-y-en-los-discuxedpulos}}

\bibleverse{5} Pero ahora me voy con el que me ha enviado, y ninguno de
vosotros me pregunta: ``¿Adónde vas?'' \bibleverse{6} Pero como os he
dicho estas cosas, la tristeza ha llenado vuestro corazón.
\bibleverse{7} Sin embargo, os digo la verdad: os conviene que me vaya,
porque si no me voy, el Consejero no vendrá a vosotros. Pero si me voy,
os lo enviaré. \footnote{\textbf{16:7} Juan 14,16; Juan 14,26}
\bibleverse{8} Cuando venga, convencerá al mundo de pecado, de justicia
y de juicio; \bibleverse{9} de pecado, porque no creen en mí;
\footnote{\textbf{16:9} Juan 15,22; Juan 15,24} \bibleverse{10} de
justicia, porque me voy a mi Padre y ya no me veréis; \footnote{\textbf{16:10}
  Hech 5,31; Rom 4,25} \bibleverse{11} de juicio, porque el príncipe de
este mundo ha sido juzgado. \footnote{\textbf{16:11} Juan 12,31}

\bibleverse{12} ``Todavía tengo muchas cosas que deciros, pero ahora no
podéis soportarlas. \footnote{\textbf{16:12} 1Cor 3,1} \bibleverse{13}
Sin embargo, cuando él, el Espíritu de la verdad, haya venido, os guiará
a toda la verdad, porque no hablará por su cuenta, sino que hablará todo
lo que oiga. Él os anunciará las cosas que se avecinan. \footnote{\textbf{16:13}
  Juan 14,26; 1Jn 2,27} \bibleverse{14} Él me glorificará, porque tomará
de lo mío y os lo declarará. \bibleverse{15} Todo lo que tiene el Padre
es mío; por eso he dicho que toma\footnote{\textbf{16:15} TR dice
  ``tomará'' en lugar de ``toma''} de lo mío y os lo anunciará.
\footnote{\textbf{16:15} Juan 3,35; Juan 17,10}

\hypertarget{promesa-de-una-reuniuxf3n-temprana-y-amonestaciuxf3n-de-orar-en-el-nombre-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Promesa de una reunión temprana y amonestación de orar en el
nombre de
Jesús}\label{promesa-de-una-reuniuxf3n-temprana-y-amonestaciuxf3n-de-orar-en-el-nombre-de-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{16} ``Un poco de tiempo, y no me verás. De nuevo un poco de
tiempo, y me verás''. \footnote{\textbf{16:16} Juan 14,19}

\bibleverse{17} Entonces algunos de sus discípulos se dijeron unos a
otros: ``¿Qué es eso que nos dice: ``Un poco de tiempo y no me veréis, y
de nuevo un poco de tiempo y me veréis'', y ``porque voy al Padre''?''
\bibleverse{18} Dijeron entonces: ``¿Qué es eso que dice: `Un poco de
tiempo'? No sabemos lo que dice''.

\bibleverse{19} Por lo tanto, Jesús se dio cuenta de que querían
preguntarle, y les dijo: ``¿Preguntáis entre vosotros acerca de esto que
he dicho: ``Un poco de tiempo y no me veréis, y de nuevo un poco de
tiempo y me veréis''? \bibleverse{20} Ciertamente os digo que lloraréis
y os lamentaréis, pero el mundo se alegrará. Estaréis tristes, pero
vuestra tristeza se convertirá en alegría. \footnote{\textbf{16:20} Mar
  16,10} \bibleverse{21} La mujer, cuando da a luz, se entristece porque
ha llegado su hora. Pero cuando ha dado a luz al niño, ya no se acuerda
de la angustia, por la alegría de que haya nacido un ser humano en el
mundo. \footnote{\textbf{16:21} Is 26,17} \bibleverse{22} Por eso ahora
tienes angustia, pero volveré a verte, y tu corazón se alegrará, y nadie
te quitará la alegría.

\bibleverse{23} ``En aquel día no me preguntaréis nada. Os aseguro que
todo lo que pidáis al Padre en mi nombre, os lo dará. \footnote{\textbf{16:23}
  Juan 14,13-14} \bibleverse{24} Hasta ahora no habéis pedido nada en mi
nombre. Pedid y recibiréis, para que vuestra alegría sea completa.
\footnote{\textbf{16:24} Juan 15,11}

\hypertarget{promesa-de-completar-la-comuniuxf3n-con-dios-para-los-discuxedpulos-conclusiuxf3n-de-los-discursos-de-despedida}{%
\subsection{Promesa de completar la comunión con Dios para los
discípulos; Conclusión de los discursos de
despedida}\label{promesa-de-completar-la-comuniuxf3n-con-dios-para-los-discuxedpulos-conclusiuxf3n-de-los-discursos-de-despedida}}

\bibleverse{25} ``Os he hablado de estas cosas en parábolas. Pero viene
el tiempo en que ya no os hablaré por parábolas, sino que os hablaré
claramente del Padre. \bibleverse{26} En aquel día pediréis en mi
nombre; y no os digo que yo rogaré al Padre por vosotros,
\bibleverse{27} pues el Padre mismo os ama, porque vosotros me habéis
amado y habéis creído que he venido de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{16:27}
  Juan 14,21} \bibleverse{28} Yo he salido del Padre y he venido al
mundo. De nuevo, dejo el mundo y voy al Padre''.

\bibleverse{29} Sus discípulos le dijeron: ``He aquí que ahora hablas
con claridad y no usas parábolas. \bibleverse{30} Ahora sabemos que lo
sabes todo y que no necesitas que nadie te cuestione. Por eso creemos
que has venido de Dios''.

\bibleverse{31} Jesús les respondió: ``¿Ahora creéis? \bibleverse{32} He
aquí que viene el tiempo, y ya ha llegado, en que seréis dispersados,
cada uno a su lugar, y me dejaréis solo. Pero no estoy solo, porque el
Padre está conmigo. \footnote{\textbf{16:32} Zac 13,7; Mat 26,31}
\bibleverse{33} Os he dicho estas cosas para que en mí tengáis paz. En
el mundo tenéis problemas; pero ¡anímense! Yo he vencido al mundo''.
\footnote{\textbf{16:33} Juan 14,27; Rom 5,1; 1Jn 5,4}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{16}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} ``I have said these things to you so that you wouldn't be
caused to stumble. \bibleverse{2} They will put you out of the
synagogues. Yes, the time is coming that whoever kills you will think
that he offers service to God. \bibleverse{3} They will do these
things\footnote{\textbf{16:3} TR adds ``to you''} because they have not
known the Father nor me. \bibleverse{4} But I have told you these things
so that when the time comes, you may remember that I told you about
them. I didn't tell you these things from the beginning, because I was
with you. \bibleverse{5} But now I am going to him who sent me, and none
of you asks me, `Where are you going?' \bibleverse{6} But because I have
told you these things, sorrow has filled your heart. \bibleverse{7}
Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is to your advantage that I go
away; for if I don't go away, the Counselor won't come to you. But if I
go, I will send him to you. \bibleverse{8} When he has come, he will
convict the world about sin, about righteousness, and about judgment;
\bibleverse{9} about sin, because they don't believe in me;
\bibleverse{10} about righteousness, because I am going to my Father,
and you won't see me any more; \bibleverse{11} about judgment, because
the prince of this world has been judged.

\bibleverse{12} ``I still have many things to tell you, but you can't
bear them now. \bibleverse{13} However, when he, the Spirit of truth,
has come, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak from
himself; but whatever he hears, he will speak. He will declare to you
things that are coming. \bibleverse{14} He will glorify me, for he will
take from what is mine and will declare it to you. \bibleverse{15} All
things that the Father has are mine; therefore I said that he
takes\footnote{\textbf{16:15} TR reads ``will take'' instead of
  ``takes''} of mine and will declare it to you.

\bibleverse{16} ``A little while, and you will not see me. Again a
little while, and you will see me.''

\bibleverse{17} Some of his disciples therefore said to one another,
``What is this that he says to us, `A little while, and you won't see
me, and again a little while, and you will see me;' and, `Because I go
to the Father'?'' \bibleverse{18} They said therefore, ``What is this
that he says, `A little while'? We don't know what he is saying.''

\bibleverse{19} Therefore Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask him,
and he said to them, ``Do you inquire among yourselves concerning this,
that I said, `A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little
while, and you will see me?' \bibleverse{20} Most certainly I tell you
that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be
sorrowful, but your sorrow will be turned into joy. \bibleverse{21} A
woman, when she gives birth, has sorrow because her time has come. But
when she has delivered the child, she doesn't remember the anguish any
more, for the joy that a human being is born into the world.
\bibleverse{22} Therefore you now have sorrow, but I will see you again,
and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from
you.

\bibleverse{23} ``In that day you will ask me no questions. Most
certainly I tell you, whatever you may ask of the Father in my name, he
will give it to you. \bibleverse{24} Until now, you have asked nothing
in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be made full.

\bibleverse{25} ``I have spoken these things to you in figures of
speech. But the time is coming when I will no more speak to you in
figures of speech, but will tell you plainly about the Father.
\bibleverse{26} In that day you will ask in my name; and I don't say to
you that I will pray to the Father for you, \bibleverse{27} for the
Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed
that I came from God. \bibleverse{28} I came from the Father and have
come into the world. Again, I leave the world and go to the Father.''

\bibleverse{29} His disciples said to him, ``Behold, now you are
speaking plainly, and using no figures of speech. \bibleverse{30} Now we
know that you know all things, and don't need for anyone to question
you. By this we believe that you came from God.''

\bibleverse{31} Jesus answered them, ``Do you now believe?
\bibleverse{32} Behold, the time is coming, yes, and has now come, that
you will be scattered, everyone to his own place, and you will leave me
alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
\bibleverse{33} I have told you these things, that in me you may have
peace. In the world you have trouble; but cheer up! I have overcome the
world.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{oraciuxf3n-de-despedida-de-jesuxfas-con-los-suyos-y-para-los-suyos}{%
\subsection{Oración de despedida de Jesús con los suyos y para los
suyos}\label{oraciuxf3n-de-despedida-de-jesuxfas-con-los-suyos-y-para-los-suyos}}

\hypertarget{section-32}{%
\section{17}\label{section-32}}

\bibleverse{1} Jesús dijo estas cosas y, levantando los ojos al cielo,
dijo: ``Padre, ha llegado el momento. Glorifica a tu Hijo, para que tu
Hijo también te glorifique a ti; \bibleverse{2} así como le diste
autoridad sobre toda carne, así dará vida eterna a todos los que le has
dado. \footnote{\textbf{17:2} Mat 11,27} \bibleverse{3} Esta es la vida
eterna: que te conozcan a ti, el único Dios verdadero, y al que has
enviado, Jesucristo. \footnote{\textbf{17:3} 1Jn 5,20} \bibleverse{4} Yo
te he glorificado en la tierra. He cumplido la obra que me has
encomendado. \bibleverse{5} Ahora, Padre, glorifícame tú mismo con la
gloria que tenía contigo antes de que el mundo existiera. \footnote{\textbf{17:5}
  Juan 1,1; Fil 2,6}

\hypertarget{la-intercesiuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-por-el-mantenimiento-de-los-discuxedpulos-en-el-conocimiento-correcto-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La intercesión de Jesús por el mantenimiento de los
discípulos en el conocimiento correcto de
Dios}\label{la-intercesiuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-por-el-mantenimiento-de-los-discuxedpulos-en-el-conocimiento-correcto-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{6} ``He revelado tu nombre al pueblo que me has dado fuera
del mundo. Eran tuyos y me los has dado. Ellos han cumplido tu palabra.
\bibleverse{7} Ahora han sabido que todas las cosas que me has dado
vienen de ti, \bibleverse{8} porque las palabras que me has dado se las
he dado a ellos; y las han recibido, y han sabido con certeza que vengo
de ti. Han creído que tú me has enviado. \footnote{\textbf{17:8} Juan
  16,30} \bibleverse{9} Yo rezo por ellos. No ruego por el mundo, sino
por los que me has dado, porque son tuyos. \footnote{\textbf{17:9} Juan
  6,37; Juan 6,44} \bibleverse{10} Todas las cosas que son mías son
tuyas, y las tuyas son mías, y yo soy glorificado en ellas. \footnote{\textbf{17:10}
  Juan 16,15} \bibleverse{11} Yo ya no estoy en el mundo, pero éstos
están en el mundo, y yo voy a ti. Padre santo, guárdalos por tu nombre
que me has dado, para que sean uno, como nosotros. \bibleverse{12}
Mientras estuve con ellos en el mundo, los guardé en tu nombre. He
guardado a los que me has dado. Ninguno de ellos se ha perdido, sino el
hijo de la destrucción, para que se cumpla la Escritura. \footnote{\textbf{17:12}
  Juan 6,39; Sal 41,9} \bibleverse{13} Pero ahora vengo a ti, y digo
estas cosas en el mundo, para que tengan mi gozo pleno en ellos.
\footnote{\textbf{17:13} Juan 15,11} \bibleverse{14} Les he dado tu
palabra. El mundo los ha odiado porque no son del mundo, así como yo no
soy del mundo. \footnote{\textbf{17:14} Juan 15,19} \bibleverse{15} No
ruego que los quites del mundo, sino que los guardes del maligno.
\footnote{\textbf{17:15} Mat 6,13; 2Tes 3,3} \bibleverse{16} No son del
mundo, como tampoco yo soy del mundo. \bibleverse{17} Santifícalos en tu
verdad. Tu palabra es la verdad. \footnote{\textbf{17:17} 17:17 Salmo
  119:142} \footnote{\textbf{17:17} Sal 119,160} \bibleverse{18} Como me
enviaste al mundo, así los he enviado yo al mundo. \footnote{\textbf{17:18}
  Juan 20,21} \bibleverse{19} Por ellos me santifico, para que ellos
también sean santificados en la verdad. \footnote{\textbf{17:19} Heb
  10,10}

\hypertarget{intercesiuxf3n-por-todos-los-creyentes}{%
\subsection{Intercesión por todos los
creyentes}\label{intercesiuxf3n-por-todos-los-creyentes}}

\bibleverse{20} ``No ruego sólo por éstos, sino también por los que
crean en mí por medio de su palabra, \footnote{\textbf{17:20} Rom 10,17}
\bibleverse{21} para que todos sean uno, como tú, Padre, estás en mí, y
yo en ti, para que también ellos sean uno en nosotros; para que el mundo
crea que tú me has enviado. \footnote{\textbf{17:21} Gal 3,28}
\bibleverse{22} La gloria que me has dado, yo se la he dado a ellos,
para que sean uno, como nosotros somos uno, \footnote{\textbf{17:22}
  Hech 4,32} \bibleverse{23} yo en ellos y tú en mí, para que se
perfeccionen en uno, para que el mundo sepa que tú me has enviado y que
los has amado, como a mí. \footnote{\textbf{17:23} 1Cor 6,17}
\bibleverse{24} Padre, quiero que también los que me has dado estén
conmigo donde yo estoy, para que vean mi gloria que me has dado, porque
me has amado antes de la fundación del mundo. \footnote{\textbf{17:24}
  Juan 12,26} \bibleverse{25} Padre justo, el mundo no te ha conocido,
pero yo te he conocido, y éstos han sabido que tú me has enviado.
\bibleverse{26} Yoles he dado a conocer tu nombre, y lo daré a conocer,
para que el amor con que me has amado esté en ellos, y yo en ellos.''

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-33}{%
\section{17}\label{section-33}}

\bibleverse{1} Jesus said these things, then lifting up his eyes to
heaven, he said, ``Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that
your Son may also glorify you; \bibleverse{2} even as you gave him
authority over all flesh, so he will give eternal life to all whom you
have given him. \bibleverse{3} This is eternal life, that they should
know you, the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
\bibleverse{4} I glorified you on the earth. I have accomplished the
work which you have given me to do. \bibleverse{5} Now, Father, glorify
me with your own self with the glory which I had with you before the
world existed.

\bibleverse{6} ``I revealed your name to the people whom you have given
me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given them to me.
They have kept your word. \bibleverse{7} Now they have known that all
things whatever you have given me are from you, \bibleverse{8} for the
words which you have given me I have given to them; and they received
them, and knew for sure that I came from you. They have believed that
you sent me. \bibleverse{9} I pray for them. I don't pray for the world,
but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours.
\bibleverse{10} All things that are mine are yours, and yours are mine,
and I am glorified in them. \bibleverse{11} I am no more in the world,
but these are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep
them through your name which you have given me, that they may be one,
even as we are. \bibleverse{12} While I was with them in the world, I
kept them in your name. I have kept those whom you have given me. None
of them is lost except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled. \bibleverse{13} But now I come to you, and I say these
things in the world, that they may have my joy made full in themselves.
\bibleverse{14} I have given them your word. The world hated them
because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
\bibleverse{15} I pray not that you would take them from the world, but
that you would keep them from the evil one. \bibleverse{16} They are not
of the world, even as I am not of the world. \bibleverse{17} Sanctify
them in your truth. Your word is truth.\footnote{\textbf{17:17} Psalm
  119:142} \bibleverse{18} As you sent me into the world, even so I have
sent them into the world. \bibleverse{19} For their sakes I sanctify
myself, that they themselves also may be sanctified in truth.

\bibleverse{20} ``Not for these only do I pray, but for those also who
will believe in me through their word, \bibleverse{21} that they may all
be one; even as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may
be one in us; that the world may believe that you sent me.
\bibleverse{22} The glory which you have given me, I have given to them,
that they may be one, even as we are one, \bibleverse{23} I in them, and
you in me, that they may be perfected into one, that the world may know
that you sent me and loved them, even as you loved me. \bibleverse{24}
Father, I desire that they also whom you have given me be with me where
I am, that they may see my glory which you have given me, for you loved
me before the foundation of the world. \bibleverse{25} Righteous Father,
the world hasn't known you, but I knew you; and these knew that you sent
me. \bibleverse{26} I made known to them your name, and will make it
known; that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I in
them.''

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-en-getsemanuxed-judas-malco-arresto-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Jesús en Getsemaní: Judas, Malco, arresto de
Jesús}\label{jesuxfas-en-getsemanuxed-judas-malco-arresto-de-jesuxfas}}

\hypertarget{section-34}{%
\section{18}\label{section-34}}

\bibleverse{1} Cuando Jesús hubo dicho estas palabras, salió con sus
discípulos por el torrente Cedrón, donde había un huerto en el que
entraron él y sus discípulos. \bibleverse{2} También Judas, el que lo
traicionó, conocía el lugar, porque Jesús se reunía allí a menudo con
sus discípulos. \footnote{\textbf{18:2} Luc 21,37} \bibleverse{3}
Entonces Judas, habiendo tomado un destacamento de soldados y oficiales
de los sumos sacerdotes y de los fariseos, llegó allí con linternas,
antorchas y armas. \bibleverse{4} Jesús, pues, sabiendo todo lo que le
pasaba, salió y les dijo: ``¿A quién buscáis?''

\bibleverse{5} Le respondieron: ``Jesús de Nazaret''. Jesús les dijo:
``Yo soy''. También Judas, el que le traicionó, estaba con ellos.
\bibleverse{6} Por eso, cuando les dijo: ``Yo soy'', retrocedieron y
cayeron al suelo.

\bibleverse{7} Por eso les preguntó de nuevo: ``¿A quién buscáis?''.
Dijeron: ``Jesús de Nazaret''.

\bibleverse{8} Jesús respondió: ``Os he dicho que yo soy. Si, pues, me
buscáis, dejad que éstos se vayan'', \bibleverse{9} para que se cumpla
la palabra que dijo: ``De los que me has dado, no he perdido a
ninguno''. \footnote{\textbf{18:9} Juan 6:39} \footnote{\textbf{18:9}
  Juan 17,12}

\bibleverse{10} Entonces Simón Pedro, teniendo una espada, la sacó,
hirió al siervo del sumo sacerdote y le cortó la oreja derecha. El
siervo se llamaba Malco. \bibleverse{11} Entonces Jesús dijo a Pedro:
``Mete la espada en la vaina. El cáliz que el Padre me ha dado, ¿no lo
voy a beber?''

\bibleverse{12} Entonces el destacamento, el comandante y los oficiales
de los judíos prendieron a Jesús y lo ataron, \bibleverse{13} y lo
llevaron primero a Anás, porque era suegro de Caifás, que era sumo
sacerdote aquel año. \bibleverse{14} Fue Caifás quien aconsejó a los
judíos que era conveniente que un hombre pereciera por el pueblo.
\footnote{\textbf{18:14} Juan 11,49-50; Luc 3,1-2}

\hypertarget{primera-negaciuxf3n-de-pedro}{%
\subsection{Primera negación de
Pedro}\label{primera-negaciuxf3n-de-pedro}}

\bibleverse{15} Simón Pedro siguió a Jesús, al igual que otro discípulo.
Aquel discípulo era conocido del sumo sacerdote, y entró con Jesús en el
atrio del sumo sacerdote; \bibleverse{16} pero Pedro estaba fuera, a la
puerta. Entonces el otro discípulo, que era conocido del sumo sacerdote,
salió y habló a la que guardaba la puerta, e hizo entrar a Pedro.
\bibleverse{17} Entonces la criada que guardaba la puerta dijo a Pedro:
``¿Eres tú también uno de los discípulos de este hombre?'' Él dijo: ``No
lo soy''.

\bibleverse{18} Los sirvientes y los oficiales estaban allí de pie,
habiendo hecho un fuego de brasas, pues hacía frío. Se estaban
calentando. Pedro estaba con ellos, de pie y calentándose.

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-ante-los-sumos-sacerdotes-anuxe1s-y-caifuxe1s}{%
\subsection{Jesús ante los sumos sacerdotes Anás y
Caifás}\label{jesuxfas-ante-los-sumos-sacerdotes-anuxe1s-y-caifuxe1s}}

\bibleverse{19} El sumo sacerdote preguntó entonces a Jesús por sus
discípulos y por su enseñanza.

\bibleverse{20} Jesús le contestó: ``Yo hablé abiertamente al mundo.
Siempre enseñé en las sinagogas y en el templo, donde siempre se reúnen
los judíos. No dije nada en secreto. \footnote{\textbf{18:20} Juan 7,14;
  Juan 7,26} \bibleverse{21} ¿Por qué me preguntas? Preguntad a los que
me han oído lo que les he dicho. He aquí que ellos saben las cosas que
dije''.

\bibleverse{22} Cuando hubo dicho esto, uno de los oficiales que estaban
allí abofeteó a Jesús con la mano, diciendo: ``¿Así respondes al sumo
sacerdote?''

\bibleverse{23} Jesús le respondió: ``Si he hablado mal, testifica el
mal; pero si está bien, ¿por qué me golpeas?''

\bibleverse{24} Anás lo envió atado a Caifás, el sumo sacerdote.

\hypertarget{segunda-y-tercera-negaciuxf3n-de-pedro}{%
\subsection{Segunda y tercera negación de
Pedro}\label{segunda-y-tercera-negaciuxf3n-de-pedro}}

\bibleverse{25} Simón Pedro estaba de pie, calentándose. Entonces le
dijeron: ``¿No eres tú también uno de sus discípulos, verdad?'' Él lo
negó y dijo: ``No lo soy''.

\bibleverse{26} Uno de los siervos del sumo sacerdote, que era pariente
del que Pedro había cortado la oreja, le dijo: ``¿No te vi en el jardín
con él?''

\bibleverse{27} Pedro, pues, lo negó de nuevo, e inmediatamente el gallo
cantó.

\hypertarget{el-interrogatorio-y-la-confesiuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-ante-el-gobernador-romano-pilato-su-flagelaciuxf3n-burla-y-condena}{%
\subsection{El interrogatorio y la confesión de Jesús ante el gobernador
romano Pilato; su flagelación, burla y
condena}\label{el-interrogatorio-y-la-confesiuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-ante-el-gobernador-romano-pilato-su-flagelaciuxf3n-burla-y-condena}}

\bibleverse{28} Condujeron, pues, a Jesús desde Caifás al pretorio. Era
temprano, y ellos mismos no entraron en el pretorio para no
contaminarse, sino para comer la Pascua. \bibleverse{29} Salió, pues,
Pilato hacia ellos y les dijo: ``¿Qué acusación traéis contra este
hombre?''

\bibleverse{30} Le respondieron: ``Si este hombre no fuera un malhechor,
no te lo habríamos entregado''.

\bibleverse{31} Pilato, pues, les dijo: ``Tomadlo vosotros y juzgadlo
según vuestra ley''. Por eso los judíos le decían: ``Nos es ilícito dar
muerte a nadie'', \footnote{\textbf{18:31} Juan 19,6-7} \bibleverse{32}
para que se cumpliera la palabra de Jesús que había dicho, dando a
entender con qué clase de muerte debía morir. \footnote{\textbf{18:32}
  Juan 12,32-33; Mat 20,19}

\bibleverse{33} Entonces Pilato entró de nuevo en el pretorio, llamó a
Jesús y le dijo: ``¿Eres tú el Rey de los judíos?''

\bibleverse{34} Jesús le respondió: ``¿Dices esto por ti mismo, o te lo
han dicho otros?''

\bibleverse{35} Pilato respondió: ``No soy judío, ¿verdad? Tu propia
nación y los jefes de los sacerdotes te entregaron a mí. ¿Qué has
hecho?''

\bibleverse{36} Jesús respondió: ``Mi Reino no es de este mundo. Si mi
Reino fuera de este mundo, mis siervos lucharían para que yo no fuera
entregado a los judíos. Pero ahora mi Reino no es de aquí''.

\bibleverse{37} Pilato, pues, le dijo: ``¿Eres entonces un rey?'' Jesús
respondió: ``Vosotros decís que soy un rey. Para eso he nacido y para
eso he venido al mundo, para dar testimonio de la verdad. Todo el que es
de la verdad escucha mi voz''. \footnote{\textbf{18:37} 1Tim 6,13}

\bibleverse{38} Pilato le dijo: ``¿Qué es la verdad?'' Cuando hubo dicho
esto, salió de nuevo a los judíos y les dijo: ``No encuentro fundamento
para una acusación contra él. \bibleverse{39} Pero ustedes tienen la
costumbre de que les suelte a alguien en la Pascua. Por tanto, ¿queréis
que os suelte al Rey de los judíos?''

\bibleverse{40} Entonces todos volvieron a gritar, diciendo: ``Este no,
sino Barrabás''. Ahora bien, Barrabás era un ladrón.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-35}{%
\section{18}\label{section-35}}

\bibleverse{1} When Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his
disciples over the brook Kidron, where there was a garden, into which he
and his disciples entered. \bibleverse{2} Now Judas, who betrayed him,
also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples.
\bibleverse{3} Judas then, having taken a detachment of soldiers and
officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with
lanterns, torches, and weapons. \bibleverse{4} Jesus therefore, knowing
all the things that were happening to him, went out and said to them,
``Who are you looking for?''

\bibleverse{5} They answered him, ``Jesus of Nazareth.''

Jesus said to them, ``I am he.''

Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them. \bibleverse{6}
When therefore he said to them, ``I am he,'' they went backward and fell
to the ground.

\bibleverse{7} Again therefore he asked them, ``Who are you looking
for?''

They said, ``Jesus of Nazareth.''

\bibleverse{8} Jesus answered, ``I told you that I am he. If therefore
you seek me, let these go their way,'' \bibleverse{9} that the word
might be fulfilled which he spoke, ``Of those whom you have given me, I
have lost none.''\footnote{\textbf{18:9} John 6:39}

\bibleverse{10} Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it, struck
the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name
was Malchus. \bibleverse{11} Jesus therefore said to Peter, ``Put the
sword into its sheath. The cup which the Father has given me, shall I
not surely drink it?''

\bibleverse{12} So the detachment, the commanding officer, and the
officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him, \bibleverse{13} and led
him to Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high
priest that year. \bibleverse{14} Now it was Caiaphas who advised the
Jews that it was expedient that one man should perish for the people.

\bibleverse{15} Simon Peter followed Jesus, as did another disciple. Now
that disciple was known to the high priest, and entered in with Jesus
into the court of the high priest; \bibleverse{16} but Peter was
standing at the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to
the high priest, went out and spoke to her who kept the door, and
brought in Peter. \bibleverse{17} Then the maid who kept the door said
to Peter, ``Are you also one of this man's disciples?''

He said, ``I am not.''

\bibleverse{18} Now the servants and the officers were standing there,
having made a fire of coals, for it was cold. They were warming
themselves. Peter was with them, standing and warming himself.

\bibleverse{19} The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his
disciples and about his teaching.

\bibleverse{20} Jesus answered him, ``I spoke openly to the world. I
always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where the Jews always
meet. I said nothing in secret. \bibleverse{21} Why do you ask me? Ask
those who have heard me what I said to them. Behold, they know the
things which I said.''

\bibleverse{22} When he had said this, one of the officers standing by
slapped Jesus with his hand, saying, ``Do you answer the high priest
like that?''

\bibleverse{23} Jesus answered him, ``If I have spoken evil, testify of
the evil; but if well, why do you beat me?''

\bibleverse{24} Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest.

\bibleverse{25} Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They
said therefore to him, ``You aren't also one of his disciples, are
you?''

He denied it and said, ``I am not.''

\bibleverse{26} One of the servants of the high priest, being a relative
of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said, ``Didn't I see you in the
garden with him?''

\bibleverse{27} Peter therefore denied it again, and immediately the
rooster crowed.

\bibleverse{28} They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the
Praetorium. It was early, and they themselves didn't enter into the
Praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the Passover.
\bibleverse{29} Pilate therefore went out to them and said, ``What
accusation do you bring against this man?''

\bibleverse{30} They answered him, ``If this man weren't an evildoer, we
wouldn't have delivered him up to you.''

\bibleverse{31} Pilate therefore said to them, ``Take him yourselves,
and judge him according to your law.''

Therefore the Jews said to him, ``It is illegal for us to put anyone to
death,'' \bibleverse{32} that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled,
which he spoke, signifying by what kind of death he should die.

\bibleverse{33} Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium,
called Jesus, and said to him, ``Are you the King of the Jews?''

\bibleverse{34} Jesus answered him, ``Do you say this by yourself, or
did others tell you about me?''

\bibleverse{35} Pilate answered, ``I'm not a Jew, am I? Your own nation
and the chief priests delivered you to me. What have you done?''

\bibleverse{36} Jesus answered, ``My Kingdom is not of this world. If my
Kingdom were of this world, then my servants would fight, that I
wouldn't be delivered to the Jews. But now my Kingdom is not from
here.''

\bibleverse{37} Pilate therefore said to him, ``Are you a king then?''

Jesus answered, ``You say that I am a king. For this reason I have been
born, and for this reason I have come into the world, that I should
testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my
voice.''

\bibleverse{38} Pilate said to him, ``What is truth?''

When he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them,
``I find no basis for a charge against him. \bibleverse{39} But you have
a custom that I should release someone to you at the Passover.
Therefore, do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?''

\bibleverse{40} Then they all shouted again, saying, ``Not this man, but
Barabbas!'' Now Barabbas was a robber.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-36}{%
\section{19}\label{section-36}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces Pilato tomó a Jesús y lo azotó. \bibleverse{2}
Los soldados trenzaron espinas en la forma de una corona y se la
pusieron en la cabeza, y lo vistieron con un manto de púrpura.
\bibleverse{3} No dejaban de decir: ``¡Salve, Rey de los Judíos!'' y no
dejaban de abofetearle.

\bibleverse{4} Entonces Pilato volvió a salir y les dijo: ``He aquí que
os lo traigo, para que sepáis que no encuentro fundamento para una
acusación contra él.''

\bibleverse{5} Salió, pues, Jesús con la corona de espinas y el manto de
púrpura. Pilato les dijo: ``He aquí el hombre''.

\bibleverse{6} Al verlo, los jefes de los sacerdotes y los oficiales
gritaron diciendo: ``¡Crucifícalo! Crucifícalo!'' Pilato les dijo:
``Tomadlo vosotros y crucificadlo, porque no encuentro fundamento para
una acusación contra él''.

\bibleverse{7} Los judíos le respondieron: ``Nosotros tenemos una ley, y
según nuestra ley debe morir, porque se hizo Hijo de Dios''. \footnote{\textbf{19:7}
  Juan 10,33; Lev 24,16}

\bibleverse{8} Cuando Pilato oyó estas palabras, tuvo más miedo.
\bibleverse{9} Entró de nuevo en el pretorio y dijo a Jesús: ``¿De dónde
eres?''. Pero Jesús no le respondió. \bibleverse{10} Entonces Pilato le
dijo: ``¿No me hablas a mí? ¿No sabes que tengo poder para liberarte y
tengo poder para crucificarte?''

\bibleverse{11} Jesús respondió: ``No tendrías ningún poder contra mí,
si no te fuera dado de arriba. Por tanto, el que me ha entregado a
vosotros tiene un pecado mayor''.

\bibleverse{12} Ante esto, Pilato quiso ponerlo en libertad, pero los
judíos gritaron diciendo: ``¡Si sueltas a este hombre, no eres amigo del
César! Todo el que se hace rey habla contra el César''. \footnote{\textbf{19:12}
  Hech 17,7}

\bibleverse{13} Cuando Pilato oyó estas palabras, sacó a Jesús y se
sentó en el tribunal en un lugar llamado ``El Pavimento'', pero en
hebreo, ``Gabbatha.'' \bibleverse{14} Era el día de la preparación de la
Pascua, hacia la hora sexta.\footnote{\textbf{19:14} ``la hora sexta''
  habría sido las 06:00 h. según el sistema horario romano, o el
  mediodía para el sistema horario judío en uso, entonces.} Dijo a los
judíos: ``¡He aquí vuestro Rey!''

\bibleverse{15} Gritaron: ``¡Fuera de aquí! ¡Fuera de aquí!
Crucifíquenlo''. Pilato les dijo: ``¿Debo crucificar a vuestro Rey?''
Los jefes de los sacerdotes respondieron: ``No tenemos más rey que el
César''. \footnote{\textbf{19:15} Juan 18,37}

\hypertarget{la-crucifixiuxf3n-y-muerte-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{La crucifixión y muerte de
Jesús}\label{la-crucifixiuxf3n-y-muerte-de-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{16} Entonces se lo entregó para que lo crucificaran.
Tomaron, pues, a Jesús y se lo llevaron. \bibleverse{17} Salió, llevando
su cruz, al lugar llamado ``Lugar de la Calavera'', que en hebreo se
llama ``Gólgota'', \bibleverse{18} donde lo crucificaron, y con él a
otros dos, uno a cada lado, y Jesús en medio. \bibleverse{19} Pilato
escribió también un título y lo puso en la cruz. Allí estaba escrito:
``JESÚS DE NAZARET, EL REY DE LOS JUDÍOS''. \bibleverse{20} Por lo
tanto, muchos de los judíos leyeron este título, porque el lugar donde
Jesús fue crucificado estaba cerca de la ciudad; y estaba escrito en
hebreo, en latín y en griego. \bibleverse{21} Los jefes de los judíos
dijeron, pues, a Pilato: ``No escribas: ``El Rey de los judíos'', sino:
``Dijo: ``Yo soy el Rey de los judíos''\,''.

\bibleverse{22} Pilato respondió: ``Lo que he escrito, lo he escrito''.

\bibleverse{23} Entonces los soldados, después de crucificar a Jesús,
tomaron sus vestidos e hicieron cuatro partes, a cada soldado una parte;
y también la túnica. La túnica era sin costura, tejida de arriba abajo.
\bibleverse{24} Entonces se dijeron unos a otros: ``No la rasguemos,
sino echemos suertes para decidir de quién será'', para que se cumpla la
Escritura que dice``Se repartieron mis ropas entre ellos. Echan a
suertes mi ropa\footnote{\textbf{19:24} Salmo 22:18} ''. Por eso los
soldados hicieron estas cosas.

\bibleverse{25} Pero junto a la cruz de Jesús estaban su madre, la
hermana de su madre, María la mujer de Cleofás y María Magdalena.
\bibleverse{26} Por eso, al ver Jesús a su madre y al discípulo al que
amaba que estaban allí, dijo a su madre: ``Mujer, ahí tienes a tu
hijo''. \footnote{\textbf{19:26} Juan 13,23} \bibleverse{27} Luego dijo
al discípulo: ``¡He ahí a tu madre! A partir de esa hora, el discípulo
se la llevó a su casa.

\bibleverse{28} Después de esto, Jesús, viendo\footnote{\textbf{19:28}
  NU, TR lee ``saber'' en lugar de ``ver''} que todo estaba ya
terminado, para que se cumpliera la Escritura, dijo: ``¡Tengo sed!''
\footnote{\textbf{19:28} Sal 22,15} \bibleverse{29} Se puso allí una
vasija llena de vinagre; entonces pusieron una esponja llena de vinagre
sobre un hisopo, y se la acercaron a la boca. \footnote{\textbf{19:29}
  Sal 69,21} \bibleverse{30} Así pues, cuando Jesús recibió el vinagre,
dijo: ``¡Se acabó!''. Entonces inclinó la cabeza y entregó su espíritu.

\bibleverse{31} Por lo tanto, los judíos, como era el día de la
preparación, para que los cuerpos no permanecieran en la cruz durante el
día de reposo (pues ese día de reposo era especial), pidieron a Pilato
que les quebraran las piernas y se los llevaran. \footnote{\textbf{19:31}
  Lev 23,7; Deut 21,23} \bibleverse{32} Vinieron, pues, los soldados y
rompieron las piernas del primero y del otro que estaba crucificado con
él; \bibleverse{33} pero cuando llegaron a Jesús y vieron que ya estaba
muerto, no le rompieron las piernas. \bibleverse{34} Sin embargo, uno de
los soldados le atravesó el costado con una lanza, e inmediatamente
salió sangre y agua. \bibleverse{35} El que ha visto ha dado testimonio,
y su testimonio es verdadero. Sabe que dice la verdad, para que creáis.
\bibleverse{36} Porque estas cosas sucedieron para que se cumpliera la
Escritura: ``Un hueso de él no será quebrado''. \footnote{\textbf{19:36}
  Éxodo 12:46; Números 9:12; Salmo 34:20} \bibleverse{37} Otra Escritura
dice: ``Mirarán al que traspasaron''. \footnote{\textbf{19:37} Zacarías
  12:10} \footnote{\textbf{19:37} Apoc 1,7}

\hypertarget{descenso-de-la-cruz-y-sepultura-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Descenso de la cruz y sepultura de
Jesús}\label{descenso-de-la-cruz-y-sepultura-de-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{38} Después de estas cosas, José de Arimatea, que era
discípulo de Jesús, pero en secreto por miedo a los judíos, pidió a
Pilato poder llevarse el cuerpo de Jesús. Pilato le dio permiso. Vino,
pues, y se llevó el cuerpo. \footnote{\textbf{19:38} Juan 7,13}
\bibleverse{39} Nicodemo, que al principio se acercó a Jesús de noche,
vino también trayendo una mezcla de mirra y áloes, como cien libras
romanas. \footnote{\textbf{19:39} 100 libras romanas de 12 onzas cada
  una, es decir, unas 72 libras o 33 kilogramos.} \footnote{\textbf{19:39}
  Juan 3,2} \bibleverse{40} Tomaron, pues, el cuerpo de Jesús y lo
envolvieron en telas de lino con las especias, según la costumbre de los
judíos de enterrarlo. \bibleverse{41} En el lugar donde fue crucificado
había un jardín. En el jardín había un sepulcro nuevo en el que nunca se
había puesto a nadie. \bibleverse{42} Entonces, a causa del día de
preparación de los judíos (pues el sepulcro estaba cerca), pusieron allí
a Jesús.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-37}{%
\section{19}\label{section-37}}

\bibleverse{1} So Pilate then took Jesus and flogged him. \bibleverse{2}
The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown and put it on his head, and
dressed him in a purple garment. \bibleverse{3} They kept saying,
``Hail, King of the Jews!'' and they kept slapping him.

\bibleverse{4} Then Pilate went out again, and said to them, ``Behold, I
bring him out to you, that you may know that I find no basis for a
charge against him.''

\bibleverse{5} Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and
the purple garment. Pilate said to them, ``Behold, the man!''

\bibleverse{6} When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw
him, they shouted, saying, ``Crucify! Crucify!''

Pilate said to them, ``Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find
no basis for a charge against him.''

\bibleverse{7} The Jews answered him, ``We have a law, and by our law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.''

\bibleverse{8} When therefore Pilate heard this saying, he was more
afraid. \bibleverse{9} He entered into the Praetorium again, and said to
Jesus, ``Where are you from?'' But Jesus gave him no answer.
\bibleverse{10} Pilate therefore said to him, ``Aren't you speaking to
me? Don't you know that I have power to release you and have power to
crucify you?''

\bibleverse{11} Jesus answered, ``You would have no power at all against
me, unless it were given to you from above. Therefore he who delivered
me to you has greater sin.''

\bibleverse{12} At this, Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews
cried out, saying, ``If you release this man, you aren't Caesar's
friend! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar!''

\bibleverse{13} When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought
Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called ``The
Pavement'', but in Hebrew, ``Gabbatha.'' \bibleverse{14} Now it was the
Preparation Day of the Passover, at about the sixth hour.\footnote{\textbf{19:14}
  ``the sixth hour'' would have been 6:00 a. m. according to the Roman
  timekeeping system, or noon for the Jewish timekeeping system in use,
  then.} He said to the Jews, ``Behold, your King!''

\bibleverse{15} They cried out, ``Away with him! Away with him! Crucify
him!''

Pilate said to them, ``Shall I crucify your King?''

The chief priests answered, ``We have no king but Caesar!''

\bibleverse{16} So then he delivered him to them to be crucified. So
they took Jesus and led him away. \bibleverse{17} He went out, bearing
his cross, to the place called ``The Place of a Skull'', which is called
in Hebrew, ``Golgotha'', \bibleverse{18} where they crucified him, and
with him two others, on either side one, and Jesus in the middle.
\bibleverse{19} Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross.
There was written, ``JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.''
\bibleverse{20} Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the
place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in
Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek. \bibleverse{21} The chief priests of the
Jews therefore said to Pilate, ``Don't write, `The King of the Jews,'
but, `he said, ``I am King of the Jews.''\,'\,''

\bibleverse{22} Pilate answered, ``What I have written, I have
written.''

\bibleverse{23} Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took
his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the
tunic. Now the tunic was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
\bibleverse{24} Then they said to one another, ``Let's not tear it, but
cast lots for it to decide whose it will be,'' that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, which says, ``They parted my garments among them. They
cast lots for my clothing.''\footnote{\textbf{19:24} Psalm 22:18}
Therefore the soldiers did these things.

\bibleverse{25} But standing by Jesus' cross were his mother, his
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
\bibleverse{26} Therefore when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple
whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, ``Woman, behold,
your son!'' \bibleverse{27} Then he said to the disciple, ``Behold, your
mother!'' From that hour, the disciple took her to his own home.

\bibleverse{28} After this, Jesus, seeing\footnote{\textbf{19:28} NU, TR
  read ``knowing'' instead of ``seeing''} that all things were now
finished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, ``I am thirsty!''
\bibleverse{29} Now a vessel full of vinegar was set there; so they put
a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop, and held it at his mouth.
\bibleverse{30} When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said,
``It is finished!'' Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.

\bibleverse{31} Therefore the Jews, because it was the Preparation Day,
so that the bodies wouldn't remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that
Sabbath was a special one), asked of Pilate that their legs might be
broken and that they might be taken away. \bibleverse{32} Therefore the
soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who was
crucified with him; \bibleverse{33} but when they came to Jesus and saw
that he was already dead, they didn't break his legs. \bibleverse{34}
However, one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and
immediately blood and water came out. \bibleverse{35} He who has seen
has testified, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the
truth, that you may believe. \bibleverse{36} For these things happened
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, ``A bone of him will not be
broken.''\footnote{\textbf{19:36} Exodus 12:46; Numbers 9:12; Psalm
  34:20} \bibleverse{37} Again another Scripture says, ``They will look
on him whom they pierced.''\footnote{\textbf{19:37} Zechariah 12:10}

\bibleverse{38} After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, being a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked of Pilate
that he might take away Jesus' body. Pilate gave him permission. He came
therefore and took away his body. \bibleverse{39} Nicodemus, who at
first came to Jesus by night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, about a hundred Roman pounds.\footnote{\textbf{19:39} 100 Roman
  pounds of 12 ounces each, or about 72 pounds, or 33 Kilograms.}
\bibleverse{40} So they took Jesus' body, and bound it in linen cloths
with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury. \bibleverse{41}
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden. In the
garden was a new tomb in which no man had ever yet been laid.
\bibleverse{42} Then, because of the Jews' Preparation Day (for the tomb
was near at hand), they laid Jesus there.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{maruxeda-magdalena-y-el-sepulcro-vacuxedo-pedro-y-juan-en-la-tumba}{%
\subsection{María Magdalena y el sepulcro vacío; Pedro y Juan en la
tumba}\label{maruxeda-magdalena-y-el-sepulcro-vacuxedo-pedro-y-juan-en-la-tumba}}

\hypertarget{section-38}{%
\section{20}\label{section-38}}

\bibleverse{1} El primer día de la semana, María Magdalena fue temprano,
cuando todavía estaba oscuro, al sepulcro, y vio que la piedra había
sido retirada del sepulcro. \bibleverse{2} Entonces corrió y vino a
Simón Pedro y al otro discípulo a quien Jesús amaba, y les dijo: ``¡Se
han llevado al Señor del sepulcro y no sabemos dónde lo han puesto!''
\footnote{\textbf{20:2} Juan 13,23}

\bibleverse{3} Salieron, pues, Pedro y el otro discípulo, y fueron hacia
el sepulcro. \bibleverse{4} Los dos corrieron juntos. El otro discípulo
se adelantó a Pedro y llegó primero al sepulcro. \bibleverse{5} Al
agacharse y mirar dentro, vio los lienzos tendidos; pero no entró.
\bibleverse{6} Entonces llegó Simón Pedro, siguiéndole, y entró en el
sepulcro. Vio los lienzos tendidos, \bibleverse{7} y el paño que había
estado sobre su cabeza, no tendido con los lienzos, sino enrollado en un
lugar aparte. \footnote{\textbf{20:7} Juan 11,44} \bibleverse{8}
Entonces entró también el otro discípulo que había llegado primero al
sepulcro, y vio y creyó. \bibleverse{9} Porque aún no entendían la
Escritura, que Él debía de resucitar de entre los muertos. \footnote{\textbf{20:9}
  Luc 24,25-27; Hech 2,24-32; 1Cor 15,4} \bibleverse{10} Entonces los
discípulos se fueron de nuevo a sus casas.

\hypertarget{apariciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-a-maruxeda-magdalena}{%
\subsection{Aparición de Jesús a María
Magdalena}\label{apariciuxf3n-de-jesuxfas-a-maruxeda-magdalena}}

\bibleverse{11} Pero María estaba fuera, junto al sepulcro, llorando.
Mientras lloraba, se inclinó y miró dentro del sepulcro, \bibleverse{12}
y vio a dos ángeles vestidos de blanco sentados, uno a la cabecera y
otro a los pies, donde estaba el cuerpo de Jesús. \bibleverse{13} Le
preguntaron: ``Mujer, ¿por qué lloras?'' Ella les dijo: ``Porque se han
llevado a mi Señor, y no sé dónde lo han puesto''. \bibleverse{14}
Cuando dijo esto, se volvió y vio a Jesús de pie, y no sabía que era
Jesús.

\bibleverse{15} Jesús le dijo: ``Mujer, ¿por qué lloras? ¿A quién
buscas?'' Ella, suponiendo que era el jardinero, le dijo: ``Señor, si te
lo has llevado, dime dónde lo has puesto y me lo llevaré''.

\bibleverse{16} Jesús le dijo: ``María''. Se volvió y le dijo:
``¡Rabboni!'', \footnote{\textbf{20:16} Rabboni es una transliteración
  de la palabra hebrea ``gran maestro''.} que es como decir
``¡Maestro!''. \footnote{\textbf{20:16} o, Maestro}

\bibleverse{17} Jesús le dijo: ``No me retengas, porque todavía no he
subido a mi Padre; pero vete a mis hermanos y diles: ``Subo a mi Padre y
a vuestro Padre, a mi Dios y a vuestro Dios''\,''. \footnote{\textbf{20:17}
  Heb 2,11-12}

\bibleverse{18} Vino María Magdalena y contó a los discípulos que había
visto al Señor y que éste le había dicho estas cosas.

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-y-los-discuxedpulos-en-la-noche-del-domingo-de-pascua}{%
\subsection{Jesús y los discípulos en la noche del domingo de
Pascua}\label{jesuxfas-y-los-discuxedpulos-en-la-noche-del-domingo-de-pascua}}

\bibleverse{19} Así pues, al atardecer de aquel día, el primero de la
semana, y estando cerradas las puertas donde estaban reunidos los
discípulos, por miedo a los judíos, vino Jesús, se puso en medio y les
dijo: ``Paz a vosotros''.

\bibleverse{20} Cuando dijo esto, les mostró las manos y el costado. Los
discípulos se alegraron al ver al Señor. \footnote{\textbf{20:20} 1Jn
  1,1} \bibleverse{21} Entonces Jesús les dijo de nuevo: ``La paz sea
con vosotros. Como el Padre me ha enviado, así os envío yo''.
\footnote{\textbf{20:21} Juan 17,18} \bibleverse{22} Dicho esto, sopló
sobre ellos y les dijo: ``Recibid el Espíritu Santo. \bibleverse{23} Si
perdonáis los pecados a alguien, le serán perdonados. Si retienen los
pecados de alguien, les son retenido''. \footnote{\textbf{20:23} Mat
  18,16}

\hypertarget{los-discuxedpulos-con-tomuxe1s}{%
\subsection{Los discípulos con
Tomás}\label{los-discuxedpulos-con-tomuxe1s}}

\bibleverse{24} Pero Tomás, uno de los doce, llamado Dídimo,\footnote{\textbf{20:24}
  o, Twin} no estaba con ellos cuando vino Jesús. \footnote{\textbf{20:24}
  Juan 11,16; Juan 14,5; Juan 21,2} \bibleverse{25} Los demás discípulos
le dijeron: ``¡Hemos visto al Señor!'' Pero él les dijo: ``Si no veo en
sus manos la huella de los clavos, si no meto mi dedo en la huella de
los clavos y si no meto mi mano en su costado, no creeré''. \footnote{\textbf{20:25}
  Juan 19,34}

\bibleverse{26} Al cabo de ocho días, sus discípulos estaban de nuevo
dentro y Tomás estaba con ellos. Llegó Jesús, con las puertas cerradas,
se puso en medio y dijo: ``La paz sea con vosotros''. \bibleverse{27}
Luego dijo a Tomás: ``Alcanza aquí tu dedo y mira mis manos. Alcanza
aquí tu mano, y métela en mi costado. No seas incrédulo, sino
creyente''.

\bibleverse{28} Tomás le respondió: ``¡Señor mío y Dios mío!''
\footnote{\textbf{20:28} Juan 1,1}

\bibleverse{29} Jesús le dijo: ``Porque me has visto,\footnote{\textbf{20:29}
  TR añade ``Thomas,''} has creído. Dichosos los que no han visto y han
creído''. \footnote{\textbf{20:29} 1Pe 1,8; Heb 11,1}

\bibleverse{30} Por eso Jesús hizo otras muchas señales en presencia de
sus discípulos, que no están escritas en este libro; \footnote{\textbf{20:30}
  Juan 21,24-25} \bibleverse{31} pero éstas se han escrito para que
creáis que Jesús es el Cristo, el Hijo de Dios, y para que creyendo
tengáis vida en su nombre. \footnote{\textbf{20:31} 1Jn 5,13}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-39}{%
\section{20}\label{section-39}}

\bibleverse{1} Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene went
early, while it was still dark, to the tomb, and saw that the stone had
been taken away from the tomb. \bibleverse{2} Therefore she ran and came
to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to
them, ``They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know
where they have laid him!''

\bibleverse{3} Therefore Peter and the other disciple went out, and they
went toward the tomb. \bibleverse{4} They both ran together. The other
disciple outran Peter and came to the tomb first. \bibleverse{5}
Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen cloths lying there; yet he
didn't enter in. \bibleverse{6} Then Simon Peter came, following him,
and entered into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying, \bibleverse{7}
and the cloth that had been on his head, not lying with the linen
cloths, but rolled up in a place by itself. \bibleverse{8} So then the
other disciple who came first to the tomb also entered in, and he saw
and believed. \bibleverse{9} For as yet they didn't know the Scripture,
that he must rise from the dead. \bibleverse{10} So the disciples went
away again to their own homes.

\bibleverse{11} But Mary was standing outside at the tomb weeping. So as
she wept, she stooped and looked into the tomb, \bibleverse{12} and she
saw two angels in white sitting, one at the head and one at the feet,
where the body of Jesus had lain. \bibleverse{13} They asked her,
``Woman, why are you weeping?''

She said to them, ``Because they have taken away my Lord, and I don't
know where they have laid him.'' \bibleverse{14} When she had said this,
she turned around and saw Jesus standing, and didn't know that it was
Jesus.

\bibleverse{15} Jesus said to her, ``Woman, why are you weeping? Who are
you looking for?''

She, supposing him to be the gardener, said to him, ``Sir, if you have
carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him
away.''

\bibleverse{16} Jesus said to her, ``Mary.''

She turned and said to him, ``Rabboni!''\footnote{\textbf{20:16} Rabboni
  is a transliteration of the Hebrew word for ``great teacher.''} which
is to say, ``Teacher!''\footnote{\textbf{20:16} or, Master}

\bibleverse{17} Jesus said to her, ``Don't hold me, for I haven't yet
ascended to my Father; but go to my brothers and tell them, `I am
ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.'\,''

\bibleverse{18} Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had
seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her. \bibleverse{19}
When therefore it was evening on that day, the first day of the week,
and when the doors were locked where the disciples were assembled, for
fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the middle and said to them,
``Peace be to you.''

\bibleverse{20} When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his
side. The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord.
\bibleverse{21} Jesus therefore said to them again, ``Peace be to you.
As the Father has sent me, even so I send you.'' \bibleverse{22} When he
had said this, he breathed on them, and said to them, ``Receive the Holy
Spirit! \bibleverse{23} If you forgive anyone's sins, they have been
forgiven them. If you retain anyone's sins, they have been retained.''

\bibleverse{24} But Thomas, one of the twelve, called
Didymus,\footnote{\textbf{20:24} or, Twin} wasn't with them when Jesus
came. \bibleverse{25} The other disciples therefore said to him, ``We
have seen the Lord!''

But he said to them, ``Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails,
put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my hand into his
side, I will not believe.''

\bibleverse{26} After eight days, again his disciples were inside and
Thomas was with them. Jesus came, the doors being locked, and stood in
the middle, and said, ``Peace be to you.'' \bibleverse{27} Then he said
to Thomas, ``Reach here your finger, and see my hands. Reach here your
hand, and put it into my side. Don't be unbelieving, but believing.''

\bibleverse{28} Thomas answered him, ``My Lord and my God!''

\bibleverse{29} Jesus said to him, ``Because you have seen
me,\footnote{\textbf{20:29} TR adds ``Thomas,''} you have believed.
Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.''

\bibleverse{30} Therefore Jesus did many other signs in the presence of
his disciples, which are not written in this book; \bibleverse{31} but
these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son
of God, and that believing you may have life in his name.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-se-revela-a-sus-discuxedpulos-en-el-lago-de-tiberuxedades}{%
\subsection{Jesús se revela a sus discípulos en el lago de
Tiberíades}\label{jesuxfas-se-revela-a-sus-discuxedpulos-en-el-lago-de-tiberuxedades}}

\hypertarget{section-40}{%
\section{21}\label{section-40}}

\bibleverse{1} Después de estas cosas, Jesús se reveló de nuevo a los
discípulos en el mar de Tiberias. Se reveló así. \bibleverse{2} Estaban
juntos Simón Pedro, Tomás, llamado Dídimo, \footnote{\textbf{21:2} o,
  Twin} Natanael, de Caná de Galilea, y los hijos de Zebedeo, y otros
dos de sus discípulos. \footnote{\textbf{21:2} Juan 1,45} \bibleverse{3}
Simón Pedro les dijo: ``Voy a pescar''. Le dijeron: ``Nosotros también
vamos contigo''. Inmediatamente salieron y entraron en la barca. Aquella
noche no pescaron nada. \bibleverse{4} Pero cuando ya se hizo de día,
Jesús se paró en la playa; pero los discípulos no sabían que era Jesús.
\footnote{\textbf{21:4} Juan 20,14; Luc 24,16} \bibleverse{5} Entonces
Jesús les dijo: ``Hijos, ¿tenéis algo de comer?'' Le respondieron:
``No''. \footnote{\textbf{21:5} Luc 24,41}

\bibleverse{6} Les dijo: ``Echad la red a la derecha de la barca y
encontraréis algunos''. Así pues, lo echaron, y entonces no pudieron
sacarla por la multitud de peces. \footnote{\textbf{21:6} Luc 5,4-7}
\bibleverse{7} Aquel discípulo al que Jesús amaba dijo a Pedro: ``¡Es el
Señor!'' Cuando Simón Pedro oyó que era el Señor, se envolvió con su
capa (pues estaba desnudo) y se arrojó al mar. \footnote{\textbf{21:7}
  Juan 13,23} \bibleverse{8} Pero los demás discípulos venían en la
barca pequeña (pues no estaban lejos de la tierra, sino a unos
doscientos codos\footnote{\textbf{21:8} 200 codos son unas 100 yardas o
  unos 91 metros} ), arrastrando la red llena de peces. \bibleverse{9}
Cuando salieron a tierra, vieron allí un fuego de brasas, con peces y
panes puestos sobre él. \bibleverse{10} Jesús les dijo: ``Traed algunos
de los peces que acabáis de pescar''.

\bibleverse{11} Simón Pedro subió y sacó la red a tierra, llena de
ciento cincuenta y tres peces grandes. A pesar de ser tantos, la red no
se rompió.

\bibleverse{12} Jesús les dijo: ``¡Vengan a desayunar!'' Ninguno de los
discípulos se atrevió a preguntarle: ``¿Quién eres tú?'', sabiendo que
era el Señor.

\bibleverse{13} Entonces Jesús se acercó, tomó el pan y se lo dio, y el
pescado también. \footnote{\textbf{21:13} Juan 6,11} \bibleverse{14}
Esta es la tercera vez que Jesús se revela a sus discípulos después de
haber resucitado.

\hypertarget{trus-reinstalado-en-su-cargo-pastoral-profecuxeda-sobre-el-fin-de-la-vida-de-pedro-y-el-discuxedpulo-amado}{%
\subsection{Trus reinstalado en su cargo pastoral; Profecía sobre el fin
de la vida de Pedro y el discípulo
amado}\label{trus-reinstalado-en-su-cargo-pastoral-profecuxeda-sobre-el-fin-de-la-vida-de-pedro-y-el-discuxedpulo-amado}}

\bibleverse{15} Cuando hubieron desayunado, Jesús dijo a Simón Pedro:
``Simón, hijo de Jonás, ¿me amas más que éstos?'' Le dijo: ``Sí, Señor;
tú sabes que te tengo afecto''. Le dijo: ``Apacienta mis corderos''.
\footnote{\textbf{21:15} Juan 1,42} \bibleverse{16} Le volvió a decir
por segunda vez: ``Simón, hijo de Jonás, ¿me amas?'' Le dijo: ``Sí,
Señor; tú sabes que te tengo afecto''. Le dijo: ``Cuida mis ovejas''.
\footnote{\textbf{21:16} 1Pe 5,2; 1Pe 5,4} \bibleverse{17} Le dijo por
tercera vez: ``Simón, hijo de Jonás, ¿me tienes afecto?'' Pedro se
afligió porque le preguntó por tercera vez: ``¿Me tienes afecto?''. Él
le dijo: ``Señor, tú lo sabes todo. Sabes que te tengo afecto''. Jesús
le dijo: ``Apacienta mis ovejas. \footnote{\textbf{21:17} Juan 13,38;
  Juan 16,30} \bibleverse{18} De cierto te digo que cuando eras joven te
vestías solo y andabas por donde querías. Pero cuando seas viejo,
extenderás tus manos, y otro te vestirá y te llevará donde no quieras.''

\bibleverse{19} Y dijo esto, dando a entender con qué clase de muerte
glorificaría a Dios. Cuando hubo dicho esto, le dijo: ``Sígueme''.
\footnote{\textbf{21:19} Juan 13,36}

\bibleverse{20} Entonces Pedro, volviéndose, vio que le seguía un
discípulo. Este era el discípulo al que Jesús amaba, el que también se
había apoyado en el pecho de Jesús en la cena y había preguntado:
``Señor, ¿quién te va a entregar?'' \footnote{\textbf{21:20} Juan 13,23;
  Juan 13,25} \bibleverse{21} Pedro, al verlo, dijo a Jesús: ``Señor, ¿y
éste?''

\bibleverse{22} Jesús le dijo: ``Si quiero que se quede hasta que yo
venga, ¿qué te importa? Sígueme''. \bibleverse{23} Así pues, se difundió
entre los hermanos el dicho de que este discípulo no moriría. Pero Jesús
no le dijo que no moriría, sino: ``Si quiero que se quede hasta que yo
venga, ¿qué te importa?''

\bibleverse{24} Este es el discípulo que da testimonio de estas cosas, y
escribió estas cosas. Sabemos que su testimonio es verdadero.
\footnote{\textbf{21:24} Juan 15,27} \bibleverse{25} Hay también muchas
otras cosas que hizo Jesús, que si se escribieran todas, supongo que ni
el mundo mismo tendría espacio para los libros que se escribirían.
\footnote{\textbf{21:25} Juan 20,30} \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-41}{%
\section{21}\label{section-41}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, Jesus revealed himself again to the
disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself this way.
\bibleverse{2} Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus,\footnote{\textbf{21:2}
  or, Twin} Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and
two others of his disciples were together. \bibleverse{3} Simon Peter
said to them, ``I'm going fishing.''

They told him, ``We are also coming with you.'' They immediately went
out and entered into the boat. That night, they caught nothing.
\bibleverse{4} But when day had already come, Jesus stood on the beach;
yet the disciples didn't know that it was Jesus. \bibleverse{5} Jesus
therefore said to them, ``Children, have you anything to eat?''

They answered him, ``No.''

\bibleverse{6} He said to them, ``Cast the net on the right side of the
boat, and you will find some.''

They cast it therefore, and now they weren't able to draw it in for the
multitude of fish. \bibleverse{7} That disciple therefore whom Jesus
loved said to Peter, ``It's the Lord!''

So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he wrapped his coat
around himself (for he was naked), and threw himself into the sea.
\bibleverse{8} But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they
were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits\footnote{\textbf{21:8}
  200 cubits is about 100 yards or about 91 meters} away), dragging the
net full of fish. \bibleverse{9} So when they got out on the land, they
saw a fire of coals there, with fish and bread laid on it.
\bibleverse{10} Jesus said to them, ``Bring some of the fish which you
have just caught.''

\bibleverse{11} Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of
one hundred fifty-three great fish. Even though there were so many, the
net wasn't torn.

\bibleverse{12} Jesus said to them, ``Come and eat breakfast!''

None of the disciples dared inquire of him, ``Who are you?'' knowing
that it was the Lord.

\bibleverse{13} Then Jesus came and took the bread, gave it to them, and
the fish likewise. \bibleverse{14} This is now the third time that Jesus
was revealed to his disciples after he had risen from the dead.
\bibleverse{15} So when they had eaten their breakfast, Jesus said to
Simon Peter, ``Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more than these?''

He said to him, ``Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you.''

He said to him, ``Feed my lambs.'' \bibleverse{16} He said to him again
a second time, ``Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me?''

He said to him, ``Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you.''

He said to him, ``Tend my sheep.'' \bibleverse{17} He said to him the
third time, ``Simon, son of Jonah, do you have affection for me?''

Peter was grieved because he asked him the third time, ``Do you have
affection for me?'' He said to him, ``Lord, you know everything. You
know that I have affection for you.''

Jesus said to him, ``Feed my sheep. \bibleverse{18} Most certainly I
tell you, when you were young, you dressed yourself and walked where you
wanted to. But when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and
another will dress you and carry you where you don't want to go.''

\bibleverse{19} Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he
would glorify God. When he had said this, he said to him, ``Follow me.''

\bibleverse{20} Then Peter, turning around, saw a disciple following.
This was the disciple whom Jesus loved, the one who had also leaned on
Jesus' breast at the supper and asked, ``Lord, who is going to betray
you?'' \bibleverse{21} Peter, seeing him, said to Jesus, ``Lord, what
about this man?''

\bibleverse{22} Jesus said to him, ``If I desire that he stay until I
come, what is that to you? You follow me.'' \bibleverse{23} This saying
therefore went out among the brothers\footnote{\textbf{21:23} The word
  for ``brothers'' here may be also correctly translated ``brothers and
  sisters'' or ``siblings.''} that this disciple wouldn't die. Yet Jesus
didn't say to him that he wouldn't die, but, ``If I desire that he stay
until I come, what is that to you?''

\bibleverse{24} This is the disciple who testifies about these things,
and wrote these things. We know that his witness is true.
\bibleverse{25} There are also many other things which Jesus did, which
if they would all be written, I suppose that even the world itself
wouldn't have room for the books that would be written.
\end{otherlanguage} \end{paracol}
