\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{nombre-del-remitente-y-destinatario-de-la-carta-y-bendiciuxf3n-apostuxf3lica-a-la-congregaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Nombre del remitente y destinatario de la carta y bendición
apostólica a la
congregación}\label{nombre-del-remitente-y-destinatario-de-la-carta-y-bendiciuxf3n-apostuxf3lica-a-la-congregaciuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Pablo, siervo de Jesucristo, llamado a ser apóstol,
apartado para la Buena Nueva de Dios, \footnote{\textbf{1:1} Hech 9,15;
  Hech 13,2; Gal 1,15} \bibleverse{2} que él prometió antes por medio de
sus profetas en las santas Escrituras, \footnote{\textbf{1:2} Rom
  14,24-25; Tit 1,2; Luc 1,70} \bibleverse{3} acerca de su Hijo, que
nació de la descendencia de David según la carne, \footnote{\textbf{1:3}
  2Sam 7,12; Mat 22,42; Rom 9,5} \bibleverse{4} que fue declarado Hijo
de Dios con poder según el Espíritu de santidad, por la resurrección de
entre los muertos, Jesucristo nuestro Señor, \footnote{\textbf{1:4} Hech
  13,33; Mat 28,18} \bibleverse{5} por quien recibimos la gracia y el
apostolado para la obediencia de la fe entre todas las naciones por
causa de su nombre; \footnote{\textbf{1:5} Rom 15,18; Gal 2,7; Gal 2,9;
  Hech 26,16-18} \bibleverse{6} entre los cuales también estáis llamados
a pertenecer a Jesucristo; \bibleverse{7} a todos los que están en Roma,
amados de Dios, llamados a ser santos: Gracia a vosotros y paz de parte
de Dios nuestro Padre y del Señor Jesucristo. \footnote{\textbf{1:7}
  1Cor 1,2; 2Cor 1,1-2; Efes 1,1; Núm 6,24-26}

\hypertarget{acciuxf3n-de-gracias-del-apuxf3stol-a-dios-por-el-estado-de-fe-de-la-comunidad-y-expresiuxf3n-del-deseo-de-poder-predicar-el-mensaje-de-salvaciuxf3n-tambiuxe9n-en-roma}{%
\subsection{Acción de gracias del Apóstol a Dios por el estado de fe de
la comunidad y expresión del deseo de poder predicar el mensaje de
salvación también en
Roma}\label{acciuxf3n-de-gracias-del-apuxf3stol-a-dios-por-el-estado-de-fe-de-la-comunidad-y-expresiuxf3n-del-deseo-de-poder-predicar-el-mensaje-de-salvaciuxf3n-tambiuxe9n-en-roma}}

\bibleverse{8} En primer lugar, doy gracias a mi Dios, por medio de
Jesucristo, por todos vosotros, porque vuestra fe es proclamada en todo
el mundo. \footnote{\textbf{1:8} Rom 16,19} \bibleverse{9} Porque Dios
es mi testigo, a quien sirvo en mi espíritu en la Buena Nueva de su
Hijo, de cómo incesantemente hago mención de vosotros siempre en mis
oraciones, \footnote{\textbf{1:9} Efes 1,16} \bibleverse{10}
solicitando, si de alguna manera ahora por fin, me sea prosperada la
voluntad de Dios para ir a vosotros. \footnote{\textbf{1:10} Rom 15,23;
  Rom 15,32; Hech 19,21} \bibleverse{11} Porque anhelo veros, para poder
impartiros algún don espiritual, con el fin de que seáis firmes;
\footnote{\textbf{1:11} Rom 15,29} \bibleverse{12} es decir, para que yo
con vosotros me anime en vosotros, cada uno por la fe del otro, tanto la
vuestra como la mía. \footnote{\textbf{1:12} 2Pe 1,1}

\bibleverse{13} Ahora bien, no quiero que ignoréis, hermanos, que muchas
veces planeé ir a vosotros (y me lo impidieron hasta ahora), para tener
algún fruto también entre vosotros, como entre los demás gentiles.
\bibleverse{14} Soy deudor tanto de griegos como de extranjeros, tanto
de sabios como de necios. \bibleverse{15} Así que, en la medida en que
está en mí, estoy deseoso de predicar la Buena Nueva también a vosotros
que estáis en Roma.

\hypertarget{indicaciuxf3n-del-tema-la-justificaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Indicación del tema: La
justificación}\label{indicaciuxf3n-del-tema-la-justificaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{16} Porque no me avergüenzo de la Buena Nueva de Cristo,
porque es poder de Dios para la salvación de todo el que cree, primero
para el judío y también para el griego. \footnote{\textbf{1:16} Sal
  119,46; 1Cor 1,18; 1Cor 1,24; 2Tim 1,8} \bibleverse{17} Porque en ella
se revela la justicia de Dios de fe en fe. Como está escrito: ``Pero el
justo vivirá por la fe''. \footnote{\textbf{1:17} Rom 3,21-22}

\hypertarget{la-culpa-del-pecado-de-todo-paganismo}{%
\subsection{La culpa del pecado de todo
paganismo}\label{la-culpa-del-pecado-de-todo-paganismo}}

\bibleverse{18} Porque la ira de Dios se revela desde el cielo contra
toda impiedad e injusticia de los hombres que reprimen la verdad con
injusticia, \bibleverse{19} porque lo que se conoce de Dios se revela en
ellos, pues Dios se lo reveló. \footnote{\textbf{1:19} Hech 14,15-17;
  Hech 17,24-28} \bibleverse{20} Porque las cosas invisibles de él,
desde la creación del mundo, se ven claramente, percibiéndose por medio
de las cosas hechas, su eterno poder y su divinidad, para que no tengan
excusa. \footnote{\textbf{1:20} Sal 19,1; Heb 11,3} \bibleverse{21}
Porque conociendo a Dios, no lo glorificaron como a Dios, ni le dieron
gracias, sino que se envanecieron en sus razonamientos, y su corazón
insensato se oscureció. \footnote{\textbf{1:21} Efes 4,18}

\bibleverse{22} Profesando ser sabios, se hicieron necios, \footnote{\textbf{1:22}
  Jer 10,14; 1Cor 1,20} \bibleverse{23} y cambiaron la gloria del Dios
incorruptible por la semejanza de una imagen de hombre corruptible, y de
aves, cuadrúpedos y reptiles. \footnote{\textbf{1:23} Deut 4,15-19}

\hypertarget{el-juicio-divino-sobre-el-mundo-pagano-debido-a-su-ruina}{%
\subsection{El juicio divino sobre el mundo pagano debido a su
ruina}\label{el-juicio-divino-sobre-el-mundo-pagano-debido-a-su-ruina}}

\bibleverse{24} Por eso, Dios también los entregó a la impureza en los
deseos de sus corazones, para que sus cuerpos fueran deshonrados entre
ellos; \footnote{\textbf{1:24} Hech 14,16} \bibleverse{25} que cambiaron
la verdad de Dios por la mentira, y adoraron y sirvieron a la criatura
antes que al Creador, que es bendito por los siglos. Amén.

\bibleverse{26} Por esta razón, Dios los entregó a pasiones viles.
Porque sus mujeres cambiaron la función natural por lo que es contrario
a la naturaleza. \bibleverse{27} Así también los hombres, dejando la
función natural de la mujer, ardieron en su lujuria mutua, haciendo los
hombres lo que es inapropiado con los hombres, y recibiendo en sí mismos
el debido castigo de su error. \footnote{\textbf{1:27} Lev 18,22; Lev
  20,13; 1Cor 6,9} \bibleverse{28} Así como se negaron a tener a Dios en
su conocimiento, Dios los entregó a una mente reprobada, para hacer las
cosas que no convienen; \bibleverse{29} llenos de toda injusticia,
inmoralidad sexual, maldad, codicia, malicia llenos de envidia, de
homicidios, de contiendas, de engaños, de malas costumbres, de
calumniadores secretos, \bibleverse{30} aborrecedores de Dios, de
insolencia, de arrogancia, de jactancia, de invención de cosas malas, de
desobediencia a los padres, \bibleverse{31} de falta de entendimiento,
de ruptura de la alianza, de falta de afecto natural, de falta de
perdón, de falta de misericordia; \bibleverse{32} que, conociendo la
ordenanza de Dios, de que los que practican tales cosas son dignos de
muerte, no sólo hacen lo mismo, sino que aprueban a los que las
practican.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{blessings}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\hypertarget{blessings-1}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings-1}}

\hypertarget{name-of-the-sender-and-recipient-of-the-letter-and-apostolic-blessing-to-the-congregation}{%
\subsection{Name of the sender and recipient of the letter and apostolic
blessing to the
congregation}\label{name-of-the-sender-and-recipient-of-the-letter-and-apostolic-blessing-to-the-congregation}}

\bibleverse{1} Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ,\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} called to be an apostle, set apart
for the Good News of God, \bibleverse{2} which he promised before
through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,

\hypertarget{the-apostles-prayer-of-thanksgiving-for-the-consolation-he-and-his-readers-receive-from-god-in-suffering}{%
\subsection{The apostle's prayer of thanksgiving for the consolation he
and his readers receive from God in
suffering}\label{the-apostles-prayer-of-thanksgiving-for-the-consolation-he-and-his-readers-receive-from-god-in-suffering}}

\bibleverse{3} concerning his Son, who was born of the
offspring\footnote{\textbf{1:3} or, seed} of David according to the
flesh,

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-for-the-rich-grace-of-god-that-fell-on-the-corinthians-sure-hope-for-the-future}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving of the apostle for the rich grace of God that
fell on the Corinthians; sure hope for the
future}\label{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-for-the-rich-grace-of-god-that-fell-on-the-corinthians-sure-hope-for-the-future}}

\bibleverse{4} who was declared to be the Son of God with power
according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead,
Jesus Christ our Lord, \bibleverse{5} through whom we received grace and
apostleship for obedience of faith among all the nations for his name's
sake; \bibleverse{6} among whom you are also called to belong to Jesus
Christ; \bibleverse{7} to all who are in Rome, beloved of God, called to
be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

\hypertarget{message-on-the-salvation-of-paul-and-his-collaborators-from-the-danger-of-death}{%
\subsection{Message on the salvation of Paul and his collaborators from
the danger of
death}\label{message-on-the-salvation-of-paul-and-his-collaborators-from-the-danger-of-death}}

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-to-god-for-the-state-of-faith-of-the-community-and-expression-of-the-desire-to-be-able-to-preach-the-message-of-salvation-also-in-rome}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving of the Apostle to God for the state of faith of
the community and expression of the desire to be able to preach the
message of salvation also in
Rome}\label{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-to-god-for-the-state-of-faith-of-the-community-and-expression-of-the-desire-to-be-able-to-preach-the-message-of-salvation-also-in-rome}}

\bibleverse{8} First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of
you, that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world.
\bibleverse{9} For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the
Good News of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you always in my
prayers,

\hypertarget{strife-in-the-church}{%
\subsection{Strife in the church}\label{strife-in-the-church}}

\bibleverse{10} requesting, if by any means now at last I may be
prospered by the will of God to come to you. \bibleverse{11} For I long
to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, to the end
that you may be established;

\hypertarget{the-honest-way-of-life-of-the-apostle-and-his-truthfulness-in-correspondence}{%
\subsection{The honest way of life of the apostle and his truthfulness
in
correspondence}\label{the-honest-way-of-life-of-the-apostle-and-his-truthfulness-in-correspondence}}

\bibleverse{12} that is, that I with you may be encouraged in you, each
of us by the other's faith, both yours and mine. \bibleverse{13} Now I
don't desire to have you unaware, brothers, that I often planned to come
to you (and was hindered so far), that I might have some fruit among you
also, even as among the rest of the Gentiles. \bibleverse{14} I am
debtor both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to the wise and to the
foolish.

\hypertarget{the-apostles-account-of-the-change-in-his-travel-plans-indication-of-his-trustworthiness-as-an-apostle-of-christ-and-faithful-god}{%
\subsection{The apostle's account of the change in his travel plans;
Indication of his trustworthiness as an apostle of Christ and faithful
God}\label{the-apostles-account-of-the-change-in-his-travel-plans-indication-of-his-trustworthiness-as-an-apostle-of-christ-and-faithful-god}}

\bibleverse{15} So as much as is in me, I am eager to preach the Good
News to you also who are in Rome.

\hypertarget{indication-of-the-topic-the-justification}{%
\subsection{Indication of the topic: The
justification}\label{indication-of-the-topic-the-justification}}

\bibleverse{16} For I am not ashamed of the Good News of Christ, because
it is the power of God for salvation for everyone who believes, for the
Jew first, and also for the Greek. \bibleverse{17} For in it is revealed
God's righteousness from faith to faith. As it is written, ``But the
righteous shall live by faith.''\footnote{\textbf{1:17} Habakkuk 2:4}

\hypertarget{the-sin-guilt-of-all-paganism}{%
\subsection{The sin guilt of all
paganism}\label{the-sin-guilt-of-all-paganism}}

\hypertarget{the-word-of-the-cross-is-a-divine-power-opposed-to-world-wisdom-and-respected-by-the-world-as-madness}{%
\subsection{The word of the cross is a divine power, opposed to world
wisdom and respected by the world as
madness}\label{the-word-of-the-cross-is-a-divine-power-opposed-to-world-wisdom-and-respected-by-the-world-as-madness}}

\bibleverse{18} For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who suppress the truth in
unrighteousness, \bibleverse{19} because that which is known of God is
revealed in them, for God revealed it to them. \bibleverse{20} For the
invisible things of him since the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being perceived through the things that are made, even his
everlasting power and divinity, that they may be without excuse.
\bibleverse{21} Because knowing God, they didn't glorify him as God, and
didn't give thanks, but became vain in their reasoning, and their
senseless heart was darkened. \bibleverse{22} Professing themselves to
be wise, they became fools,

\hypertarget{statement-of-the-real-reason-paul-did-not-come-to-corinth}{%
\subsection{Statement of the real reason Paul did not come to
Corinth}\label{statement-of-the-real-reason-paul-did-not-come-to-corinth}}

\bibleverse{23} and traded the glory of the incorruptible God for the
likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, four-footed
animals, and creeping things.

\hypertarget{divine-judgment-on-the-pagan-world-due-to-its-ruin}{%
\subsection{Divine judgment on the pagan world due to its
ruin}\label{divine-judgment-on-the-pagan-world-due-to-its-ruin}}

\bibleverse{24} Therefore God also gave them up in the lusts of their
hearts to uncleanness, that their bodies should be dishonored among
themselves; \bibleverse{25} who exchanged the truth of God for a lie,
and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is
blessed forever. Amen.

\hypertarget{proof-of-the-real-existence-of-the-christian-community-called-by-god-in-corinth}{%
\subsection{Proof of the real existence of the Christian community
called by God in
Corinth}\label{proof-of-the-real-existence-of-the-christian-community-called-by-god-in-corinth}}

\bibleverse{26} For this reason, God gave them up to vile passions. For
their women changed the natural function into that which is against
nature. \bibleverse{27} Likewise also the men, leaving the natural
function of the woman, burned in their lust toward one another, men
doing what is inappropriate with men, and receiving in themselves the
due penalty of their error. \bibleverse{28} Even as they refused to have
God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do
those things which are not fitting; \bibleverse{29} being filled with
all unrighteousness, sexual immorality, wickedness, covetousness,
malice; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil habits, secret
slanderers, \bibleverse{30} backbiters, hateful to God, insolent,
arrogant, boastful, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
\bibleverse{31} without understanding, covenant breakers, without
natural affection, unforgiving, unmerciful; \bibleverse{32} who, knowing
the ordinance of God, that those who practice such things are worthy of
death, not only do the same, but also approve of those who practice
them.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-juicio-de-la-ira-tambiuxe9n-estuxe1-ante-los-juduxedos-juzgar-a-los-demuxe1s-no-los-libera-del-juicio-de-dios}{%
\subsection{El juicio de la ira también está ante los judíos; juzgar a
los demás no los libera del juicio de
Dios}\label{el-juicio-de-la-ira-tambiuxe9n-estuxe1-ante-los-juduxedos-juzgar-a-los-demuxe1s-no-los-libera-del-juicio-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Por lo tanto, no tienes excusa, oh hombre, quienquiera
que seas el que juzga. Porque en lo que juzgas a otro, te condenas a ti
mismo. Porque tú, que juzgas, practicas las mismas cosas. \footnote{\textbf{2:1}
  Mat 7,2; Juan 8,7; Sant 4,12} \bibleverse{2} Sabemos que el juicio de
Dios es según la verdad contra los que practican tales cosas.
\bibleverse{3} ¿Piensas esto, oh hombre que juzgas a los que practican
tales cosas, y haces lo mismo, que escaparás del juicio de Dios?
\bibleverse{4} ¿O acaso desprecias las riquezas de su bondad, su
tolerancia y su paciencia, sin saber que la bondad de Dios te lleva al
arrepentimiento? \footnote{\textbf{2:4} 2Pe 3,9; 2Pe 3,15}
\bibleverse{5} Pero según tu dureza y tu corazón impenitente estás
atesorando para ti la ira en el día de la ira, de la revelación y del
justo juicio de Dios, \bibleverse{6} que ``pagará a cada uno según sus
obras''. \footnote{\textbf{2:6} Mat 16,27; 2Cor 5,10} \bibleverse{7} a
los que por la perseverancia en el bien obrar buscan la gloria, el honor
y la incorruptibilidad, la vida eterna; \bibleverse{8} pero a los que
son egoístas y no obedecen a la verdad, sino que obedecen a la
injusticia, será la ira, la indignación, \footnote{\textbf{2:8} 2Tes 1,8}
\bibleverse{9} la opresión y la angustia sobre toda alma de hombre que
hace el mal, al judío primero, y también al griego.

\bibleverse{10} Pero la gloria, el honor y la paz van a todo hombre que
hace el bien, al judío primero y también al griego. \bibleverse{11}
Porque para Dios no hay parcialidad. \footnote{\textbf{2:11} Hech 10,34;
  1Pe 1,17; Col 3,25}

\hypertarget{el-juicio-de-dios-es-el-mismo-para-los-juduxedos-que-para-los-gentiles-determinado-uxfanicamente-por-el-cumplimiento-de-la-ley}{%
\subsection{El juicio de Dios es el mismo para los judíos que para los
gentiles, determinado únicamente por el cumplimiento de la
ley}\label{el-juicio-de-dios-es-el-mismo-para-los-juduxedos-que-para-los-gentiles-determinado-uxfanicamente-por-el-cumplimiento-de-la-ley}}

\bibleverse{12} Porque todos los que han pecado sin la ley, también
perecerán sin la ley. Todos los que han pecado bajo la ley serán
juzgados por la ley. \bibleverse{13} Porque no son los oidores de la ley
los que son justos ante Dios, sino que los hacedores de la ley serán
justificados \footnote{\textbf{2:13} Mat 7,21; Sant 1,22}
\bibleverse{14} (porque cuando los gentiles que no tienen la ley hacen
por naturaleza las cosas de la ley, éstos, no teniendo la ley, son una
ley para sí mismos, \footnote{\textbf{2:14} Hech 10,35} \bibleverse{15}
en cuanto muestran la obra de la ley escrita en sus corazones,
testificando con ellos su conciencia, y sus pensamientos entre sí
acusándolos o bien excusándolos) \footnote{\textbf{2:15} Rom 1,32}
\bibleverse{16} en el día en que Dios juzgará los secretos de los
hombres, según mi Buena Nueva, por Jesucristo. \footnote{\textbf{2:16}
  Luc 8,17}

\hypertarget{un-mejor-conocimiento-moral-y-la-capacidad-de-enseuxf1ar-no-hacen-que-los-juduxedos-sean-justos-ante-dios-su-fama-por-la-ley-es-nula-porque-la-transgrede}{%
\subsection{Un mejor conocimiento moral y la capacidad de enseñar no
hacen que los judíos sean justos ante Dios; su fama por la ley es nula
porque la
transgrede}\label{un-mejor-conocimiento-moral-y-la-capacidad-de-enseuxf1ar-no-hacen-que-los-juduxedos-sean-justos-ante-dios-su-fama-por-la-ley-es-nula-porque-la-transgrede}}

\bibleverse{17} En efecto, tú llevas el nombre de judío, te apoyas en la
ley, te glorías en Dios, \bibleverse{18} conoces su voluntad y apruebas
las cosas excelentes, siendo instruido por la ley, \bibleverse{19} y
estás seguro de que tú mismo eres guía de ciegos, luz para los que están
en tinieblas, \footnote{\textbf{2:19} Mat 15,14} \bibleverse{20}
corrector de necios, maestro de niños, teniendo en la ley la forma del
conocimiento y de la verdad. \bibleverse{21} Tú, pues, que enseñas a
otro, ¿no te enseñas a ti mismo? Tú que predicas que el hombre no debe
robar, ¿no robas tú? \footnote{\textbf{2:21} Sal 50,16-21; Mat 23,3-4}
\bibleverse{22} Tú que dices que el hombre no debe cometer adulterio,
¿cometes adulterio? Tú que aborreces los ídolos, ¿robas los templos?
\bibleverse{23} Ustedes que se glorían en la ley, ¿deshonran a Dios
desobedeciendo la ley? \bibleverse{24} Porque ``el nombre de Dios es
blasfemado entre los gentiles a causa de vosotros'', tal como está
escrito.

\hypertarget{la-circuncisiuxf3n-no-tiene-valor-para-el-juduxedo-si-infringe-la-ley-la-circuncisiuxf3n-del-corazuxf3n-es-necesaria}{%
\subsection{La circuncisión no tiene valor para el judío si infringe la
ley; La circuncisión del ``corazón'' es
necesaria}\label{la-circuncisiuxf3n-no-tiene-valor-para-el-juduxedo-si-infringe-la-ley-la-circuncisiuxf3n-del-corazuxf3n-es-necesaria}}

\bibleverse{25} Porque la circuncisión, en efecto, es provechosa, si
eres hacedor de la ley; pero si eres transgresor de la ley, tu
circuncisión se ha convertido en incircuncisión. \footnote{\textbf{2:25}
  Jer 4,4} \bibleverse{26} Por lo tanto, si el incircunciso guarda las
ordenanzas de la ley, ¿no se considerará su incircuncisión como
circuncisión? \footnote{\textbf{2:26} Gal 5,6} \bibleverse{27} ¿No te
juzgarán los que son físicamente incircuncisos, pero cumplen la ley, que
con la letra y la circuncisión son transgresores de la ley?
\bibleverse{28} Porque no es judío el que lo es exteriormente, ni la
circuncisión que es exterior en la carne; \bibleverse{29} sino que es
judío el que lo es interiormente, y la circuncisión es la del corazón,
en el espíritu, no en la letra; cuya alabanza no proviene de los
hombres, sino de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{2:29} Deut 30,6; Fil 3,3; Col
  2,11}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-judgment-of-wrath-is-also-before-the-jews-judging-others-does-not-free-them-from-gods-judgment}{%
\subsection{The judgment of wrath is also before the Jews; judging
others does not free them from God's
judgment}\label{the-judgment-of-wrath-is-also-before-the-jews-judging-others-does-not-free-them-from-gods-judgment}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\hypertarget{pauls-way-of-preaching-when-the-church-was-founded-was-undemanding-and-lacking-in-worldly-wisdom}{%
\subsection{Paul's way of preaching when the church was founded was
undemanding and lacking in worldly
wisdom}\label{pauls-way-of-preaching-when-the-church-was-founded-was-undemanding-and-lacking-in-worldly-wisdom}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore you are without excuse, O man, whoever you are
who judge. For in that which you judge another, you condemn yourself.
For you who judge practice the same things. \bibleverse{2} We know that
the judgment of God is according to truth against those who practice
such things. \bibleverse{3} Do you think this, O man who judges those
who practice such things, and do the same, that you will escape the
judgment of God? \bibleverse{4} Or do you despise the riches of his
goodness, forbearance, and patience, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads you to repentance?

\hypertarget{closing-the-gap-between-paul-and-the-corinthians-recommendation-of-leniency-against-the-repentant-malefactor}{%
\subsection{Closing the gap between Paul and the Corinthians;
Recommendation of leniency against the repentant
malefactor}\label{closing-the-gap-between-paul-and-the-corinthians-recommendation-of-leniency-against-the-repentant-malefactor}}

\bibleverse{5} But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart you
are treasuring up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath, revelation,
and of the righteous judgment of God,

\hypertarget{the-mysterious-wisdom-of-god-for-the-perfect}{%
\subsection{The mysterious wisdom of God for the
perfect}\label{the-mysterious-wisdom-of-god-for-the-perfect}}

\bibleverse{6} who ``will pay back to everyone according to their
works:''\footnote{\textbf{2:6} Psalm 62:12; Proverbs 24:12}
\bibleverse{7} to those who by perseverance in well-doing seek for
glory, honor, and incorruptibility, eternal life; \bibleverse{8} but to
those who are self-seeking and don't obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, will be wrath, indignation, \bibleverse{9} oppression,
and anguish on every soul of man who does evil, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek.

\hypertarget{the-exploration-and-absorption-of-this-wisdom-is-only-possible-for-spiritual-people}{%
\subsection{The exploration and absorption of this wisdom is only
possible for spiritual
people}\label{the-exploration-and-absorption-of-this-wisdom-is-only-possible-for-spiritual-people}}

\bibleverse{10} But glory, honor, and peace go to every man who does
good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. \bibleverse{11} For there
is no partiality with God.

\hypertarget{gods-judgment-is-the-same-for-jews-and-gentiles-determined-solely-by-compliance-with-the-law}{%
\subsection{God's judgment is the same for Jews and Gentiles, determined
solely by compliance with the
law}\label{gods-judgment-is-the-same-for-jews-and-gentiles-determined-solely-by-compliance-with-the-law}}

\hypertarget{the-experiences-of-the-apostle-in-troas-and-macedonia-his-praise-to-god-for-the-victorious-effect-of-the-proclamation-of-salvation}{%
\subsection{The experiences of the apostle in Troas and Macedonia; His
praise to God for the victorious effect of the proclamation of
salvation}\label{the-experiences-of-the-apostle-in-troas-and-macedonia-his-praise-to-god-for-the-victorious-effect-of-the-proclamation-of-salvation}}

\bibleverse{12} For as many as have sinned without the law will also
perish without the law. As many as have sinned under the law will be
judged by the law. \bibleverse{13} For it isn't the hearers of the law
who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be justified
\bibleverse{14} (for when Gentiles who don't have the law do by nature
the things of the law, these, not having the law, are a law to
themselves, \bibleverse{15} in that they show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience testifying with them, and
their thoughts among themselves accusing or else excusing them)
\bibleverse{16} in the day when God will judge the secrets of men,
according to my Good News, by Jesus Christ.

\hypertarget{better-moral-knowledge-and-the-ability-to-teach-do-not-make-jews-righteous-before-god-his-fame-for-the-law-is-null-because-he-transgresses-it}{%
\subsection{Better moral knowledge and the ability to teach do not make
Jews righteous before God; his fame for the law is null because he
transgresses
it}\label{better-moral-knowledge-and-the-ability-to-teach-do-not-make-jews-righteous-before-god-his-fame-for-the-law-is-null-because-he-transgresses-it}}

\bibleverse{17} Indeed you bear the name of a Jew, rest on the law,
glory in God, \bibleverse{18} know his will, and approve the things that
are excellent, being instructed out of the law, \bibleverse{19} and are
confident that you yourself are a guide of the blind, a light to those
who are in darkness, \bibleverse{20} a corrector of the foolish, a
teacher of babies, having in the law the form of knowledge and of the
truth. \bibleverse{21} You therefore who teach another, don't you teach
yourself? You who preach that a man shouldn't steal, do you steal?
\bibleverse{22} You who say a man shouldn't commit adultery, do you
commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
\bibleverse{23} You who glory in the law, do you dishonor God by
disobeying the law? \bibleverse{24} For ``the name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles because of you,'' \footnote{\textbf{2:24} Isaiah
  52:5; Ezekiel 36:22} just as it is written.

\hypertarget{circumcision-has-no-value-for-the-jew-if-it-breaks-the-law-circumcision-of-the-heart-is-necessary}{%
\subsection{Circumcision has no value for the Jew if it breaks the law;
Circumcision of the ``heart'' is
necessary}\label{circumcision-has-no-value-for-the-jew-if-it-breaks-the-law-circumcision-of-the-heart-is-necessary}}

\bibleverse{25} For circumcision indeed profits, if you are a doer of
the law, but if you are a transgressor of the law, your circumcision has
become uncircumcision. \bibleverse{26} If therefore the uncircumcised
keep the ordinances of the law, won't his uncircumcision be accounted as
circumcision? \bibleverse{27} Won't those who are physically
uncircumcised, but fulfill the law, judge you, who with the letter and
circumcision are a transgressor of the law? \bibleverse{28} For he is
not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; \bibleverse{29} but he is a Jew who is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in
the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{sin-embargo-la-posiciuxf3n-privilegiada-de-los-juduxedos-permanece-su-infidelidad-pone-la-fidelidad-de-dios-en-una-luz-muxe1s-brillante}{%
\subsection{Sin embargo, la posición privilegiada de los judíos
permanece; su infidelidad pone la fidelidad de Dios en una luz más
brillante}\label{sin-embargo-la-posiciuxf3n-privilegiada-de-los-juduxedos-permanece-su-infidelidad-pone-la-fidelidad-de-dios-en-una-luz-muxe1s-brillante}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Entonces, ¿qué ventaja tiene el judío? ¿O cuál es el
beneficio de la circuncisión? \bibleverse{2} ¡Mucho en todos los
sentidos! Porque, en primer lugar, se les confiaron las revelaciones de
Dios. \footnote{\textbf{3:2} Rom 9,4; Deut 4,7-8; Sal 147,19-20}
\bibleverse{3} Pues, ¿qué pasa si algunos carecen de fe? ¿Acaso su falta
de fe anularía la fidelidad de Dios? \footnote{\textbf{3:3} Rom 9,6; Rom
  11,29; 2Tim 2,13} \bibleverse{4} ¡Que no sea así! Sí, que Dios sea
encontrado verdadero, pero todo hombre sea mentiroso. Como está escrito,
``para que se justifiquen sus palabras, y pueda prevalecer cuando entre
en juicio''. \footnote{\textbf{3:4} Sal 116,11}

\bibleverse{5} Pero si nuestra injusticia alaba la justicia de Dios,
¿qué diremos? ¿Es injusto el Dios que inflige la ira? Hablo como los
hombres. \bibleverse{6} ¡Que nunca lo sea! Porque entonces, ¿cómo
juzgará Dios al mundo? \bibleverse{7} Pues si la verdad de Dios por mi
mentira abundó para su gloria, ¿por qué también yo sigo siendo juzgado
como pecador? \bibleverse{8} ¿Por qué no (como se nos denuncia
calumniosamente, y como algunos afirman que decimos), ``Hagamos el mal,
para que venga el bien?'' Los que así dicen son justamente condenados.
\footnote{\textbf{3:8} Rom 6,1}

\hypertarget{resultado-la-corrupciuxf3n-del-pecado-se-extiende-a-gentiles-y-juduxedos-y-es-confirmada-por-numerosas-escrituras}{%
\subsection{Resultado: la corrupción del pecado se extiende a gentiles y
judíos y es confirmada por numerosas
escrituras}\label{resultado-la-corrupciuxf3n-del-pecado-se-extiende-a-gentiles-y-juduxedos-y-es-confirmada-por-numerosas-escrituras}}

\bibleverse{9} ¿Qué pasa entonces? ¿Somos mejores que ellos? No, de
ninguna manera. Porque ya hemos advertido tanto a los judíos como a los
griegos que todos están bajo el pecado. \footnote{\textbf{3:9} Rom
  1,18-999} \bibleverse{10} Como está escrito, ``No hay nadie justo; No,
no uno. \footnote{\textbf{3:10} Sal 14,1-3; Sal 53,1-3} \bibleverse{11}
No hay nadie que lo entienda. No hay nadie que busque a Dios.
\bibleverse{12} Todos se han alejado. Juntos han dejado de ser
rentables. No hay nadie que haga el bien, no, ni siquiera uno''.
\bibleverse{13} ``Su garganta es una tumba abierta. Con sus lenguas han
usado el engaño''. ``El veneno de las víboras está bajo sus labios''.
\footnote{\textbf{3:13} Sal 5,9; Sal 140,3} \bibleverse{14} ``Su boca
está llena de maldiciones y amargura''. \footnote{\textbf{3:14} Sal 10,7}
\bibleverse{15} ``Sus pies son rápidos para derramar sangre. \footnote{\textbf{3:15}
  Is 59,7-8} \bibleverse{16} La destrucción y la miseria están en sus
caminos. \bibleverse{17} El camino de la paz, no lo han conocido''.
\footnote{\textbf{3:17} Luc 1,79} \bibleverse{18} ``No hay temor de Dios
ante sus ojos''. \footnote{\textbf{3:18} Sal 36,1}

\bibleverse{19} Ahora bien, sabemos que todo lo que la ley dice, lo dice
a los que están bajo la ley, para que toda boca se cierre y todo el
mundo quede bajo el juicio de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{3:19} Rom 2,12;
  Gal 3,22} \bibleverse{20} Porque por las obras de la ley, ninguna
carne será justificada ante él; porque por la ley viene el conocimiento
del pecado. \footnote{\textbf{3:20} Sal 143,2; Gal 2,16; Rom 7,7}

\hypertarget{la-justicia-de-dios-se-otorga-a-los-que-creen-en-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{La justicia de Dios se otorga a los que creen en
Jesús}\label{la-justicia-de-dios-se-otorga-a-los-que-creen-en-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{21} Pero ahora, aparte de la ley, se ha revelado una
justicia de Dios, testificada por la ley y los profetas; \footnote{\textbf{3:21}
  Rom 1,17; Hech 10,43} \bibleverse{22} la justicia de Dios por medio de
la fe en Jesucristo, para todos y sobre todos los que creen. Porque no
hay distinción, \footnote{\textbf{3:22} Fil 3,9} \bibleverse{23} pues
todos pecaron y están destituidos de la gloria de Dios; \footnote{\textbf{3:23}
  Rom 5,2; Juan 5,44; Sal 84,11} \bibleverse{24} siendo justificados
gratuitamente por su gracia, mediante la redención que es en Cristo
Jesús, \footnote{\textbf{3:24} Rom 5,1; 2Cor 5,19; Efes 2,8}
\bibleverse{25} a quien Dios envió como sacrificio expiatorio por medio
de la fe en su sangre, para demostración de su justicia mediante la
anulación de los pecados anteriores, en la tolerancia de Dios;
\footnote{\textbf{3:25} Lev 16,12-15; Heb 4,16} \bibleverse{26} para
demostrar su justicia en este tiempo, a fin de que él mismo sea justo y
justificador del que tiene fe en Jesús.

\hypertarget{la-justicia-de-dios-por-la-fe-excluye-toda-fama-propia-y-se-aplica-tanto-a-los-gentiles-como-a-los-juduxedos}{%
\subsection{La justicia de Dios por la fe excluye toda fama propia y se
aplica tanto a los gentiles como a los
judíos}\label{la-justicia-de-dios-por-la-fe-excluye-toda-fama-propia-y-se-aplica-tanto-a-los-gentiles-como-a-los-juduxedos}}

\bibleverse{27} ¿Dónde está entonces la jactancia? Está excluida. ¿Por
qué tipo de ley? ¿De obras? No, sino por una ley de fe. \footnote{\textbf{3:27}
  1Cor 1,29; 1Cor 1,31} \bibleverse{28} Sostenemos, pues, que el hombre
es justificado por la fe sin las obras de la ley. \footnote{\textbf{3:28}
  Gal 2,16} \bibleverse{29} ¿O acaso Dios es sólo el Dios de los judíos?
¿No es también el Dios de los gentiles? Sí, también de los gentiles,
\footnote{\textbf{3:29} Rom 10,12} \bibleverse{30} pues ciertamente hay
un solo Dios que justifica por la fe a los circuncisos y por la fe a los
incircuncisos. \footnote{\textbf{3:30} Rom 4,11-12}

\bibleverse{31} ¿Anulamos entonces la ley por la fe? ¡Que nunca sea así!
No, nosotros establecemos la ley. \footnote{\textbf{3:31} Mat 5,17}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-church-of-corinth-as-a-letter-of-recommendation-for-paul-and-god-as-a-sure-foundation-of-trust-for-the-apostle}{%
\subsection{The church of Corinth as a letter of recommendation for Paul
and God as a sure foundation of trust for the
apostle}\label{the-church-of-corinth-as-a-letter-of-recommendation-for-paul-and-god-as-a-sure-foundation-of-trust-for-the-apostle}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\hypertarget{however-the-privileged-position-of-the-jews-remains-their-unfaithfulness-puts-gods-faithfulness-in-a-brighter-light}{%
\subsection{However, the privileged position of the Jews remains; their
unfaithfulness puts God's faithfulness in a brighter
light}\label{however-the-privileged-position-of-the-jews-remains-their-unfaithfulness-puts-gods-faithfulness-in-a-brighter-light}}

\hypertarget{until-now-paul-has-not-been-able-to-proclaim-full-wisdom-to-the-corinthians-due-to-their-immaturity-which-has-been-demonstrated-by-the-mischief-of-the-party}{%
\subsection{Until now Paul has not been able to proclaim full wisdom to
the Corinthians due to their immaturity, which has been demonstrated by
the mischief of the
party}\label{until-now-paul-has-not-been-able-to-proclaim-full-wisdom-to-the-corinthians-due-to-their-immaturity-which-has-been-demonstrated-by-the-mischief-of-the-party}}

\bibleverse{1} Then what advantage does the Jew have? Or what is the
profit of circumcision? \bibleverse{2} Much in every way! Because first
of all, they were entrusted with the revelations of God. \bibleverse{3}
For what if some were without faith? Will their lack of faith nullify
the faithfulness of God? \bibleverse{4} May it never be! Yes, let God be
found true, but every man a liar. As it is written, ``that you might be
justified in your words, and might prevail when you come into
judgment.''\footnote{\textbf{3:4} Psalm 51:4}

\hypertarget{they-are-servants-and-collaborators-of-god}{%
\subsection{They are servants and collaborators of
God}\label{they-are-servants-and-collaborators-of-god}}

\bibleverse{5} But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of
God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous who inflicts wrath? I speak
like men do.

\hypertarget{the-glory-of-the-new-covenant-and-the-apostolic-ministry-over-the-old-covenant-and-the-ministry-of-moses}{%
\subsection{The glory of the new covenant and the apostolic ministry
over the old covenant and the ministry of
Moses}\label{the-glory-of-the-new-covenant-and-the-apostolic-ministry-over-the-old-covenant-and-the-ministry-of-moses}}

\bibleverse{6} May it never be! For then how will God judge the world?
\bibleverse{7} For if the truth of God through my lie abounded to his
glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner? \bibleverse{8} Why not
(as we are slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say),
``Let's do evil, that good may come?'' Those who say so are justly
condemned.

\hypertarget{result-the-corruption-of-sin-extends-to-gentiles-and-jews-and-is-confirmed-by-numerous-scriptures}{%
\subsection{Result: The corruption of sin extends to Gentiles and Jews
and is confirmed by numerous
scriptures}\label{result-the-corruption-of-sin-extends-to-gentiles-and-jews-and-is-confirmed-by-numerous-scriptures}}

\bibleverse{9} What then? Are we better than they? No, in no way. For we
previously warned both Jews and Greeks that they are all under sin.

\hypertarget{every-teacher-tries-to-make-his-work-consist-of-the-fire-of-divine-judgment-of-a-day}{%
\subsection{Every teacher tries to make his work consist of the fire of
divine judgment of a
day!}\label{every-teacher-tries-to-make-his-work-consist-of-the-fire-of-divine-judgment-of-a-day}}

\bibleverse{10} As it is written, ``There is no one righteous; no, not
one. \bibleverse{11} There is no one who understands. There is no one
who seeks after God.

\hypertarget{the-difference-between-the-two-types-of-services-is-evident-both-in-their-servers-and-in-their-effects}{%
\subsection{The difference between the two types of services is evident
both in their servers and in their
effects}\label{the-difference-between-the-two-types-of-services-is-evident-both-in-their-servers-and-in-their-effects}}

\bibleverse{12} They have all turned away. They have together become
unprofitable. There is no one who does good, no, not so much as
one.''\footnote{\textbf{3:12} Psalm 14:1-3; 53:1-3; Ecclesiastes 7:20}
\bibleverse{13} ``Their throat is an open tomb. With their tongues they
have used deceit.''\footnote{\textbf{3:13} Psalm 5:9} ``The poison of
vipers is under their lips.''\footnote{\textbf{3:13} Psalm 140:3}
\bibleverse{14} ``Their mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness.''\footnote{\textbf{3:14} Psalm 10:7} \bibleverse{15} ``Their
feet are swift to shed blood. \bibleverse{16} Destruction and misery are
in their ways. \bibleverse{17} The way of peace, they haven't
known.''\footnote{\textbf{3:17} Isaiah 59:7-8} \bibleverse{18} ``There
is no fear of God before their eyes.''\footnote{\textbf{3:18} Psalm 36:1}
\bibleverse{19} Now we know that whatever things the law says, it speaks
to those who are under the law, that every mouth may be closed, and all
the world may be brought under the judgment of God. \bibleverse{20}
Because by the works of the law, no flesh will be justified in his
sight; for through the law comes the knowledge of sin.

\hypertarget{the-justice-of-god-is-granted-to-those-who-believe-in-jesus}{%
\subsection{The justice of God is granted to those who believe in
Jesus}\label{the-justice-of-god-is-granted-to-those-who-believe-in-jesus}}

\bibleverse{21} But now apart from the law, a righteousness of God has
been revealed, being testified by the law and the prophets;
\bibleverse{22} even the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus
Christ to all and on all those who believe. For there is no distinction,
\bibleverse{23} for all have sinned, and fall short of the glory of God;
\bibleverse{24} being justified freely by his grace through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, \bibleverse{25} whom God sent to be
an atoning sacrifice\footnote{\textbf{3:25} or, a propitiation} through
faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his righteousness through the
passing over of prior sins, in God's forbearance; \bibleverse{26} to
demonstrate his righteousness at this present time, that he might
himself be just and the justifier of him who has faith in Jesus.

\hypertarget{gods-righteousness-by-faith-excludes-all-self-fame-and-applies-to-gentiles-as-well-as-jews}{%
\subsection{God's righteousness by faith excludes all self fame and
applies to Gentiles as well as
Jews}\label{gods-righteousness-by-faith-excludes-all-self-fame-and-applies-to-gentiles-as-well-as-jews}}

\bibleverse{27} Where then is the boasting? It is excluded. By what kind
of law? Of works? No, but by a law of faith. \bibleverse{28} We maintain
therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the
law. \bibleverse{29} Or is God the God of Jews only? Isn't he the God of
Gentiles also? Yes, of Gentiles also, \bibleverse{30} since indeed there
is one God who will justify the circumcised by faith and the
uncircumcised through faith. \bibleverse{31} Do we then nullify the law
through faith? May it never be! No, we establish the law.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{evidencia-de-la-justicia-de-la-fe-en-abraham-y-mediante-un-testimonio-de-david}{%
\subsection{Evidencia de la justicia de la fe en Abraham y mediante un
testimonio de
David}\label{evidencia-de-la-justicia-de-la-fe-en-abraham-y-mediante-un-testimonio-de-david}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} ¿Qué diremos, pues, que ha encontrado Abraham, nuestro
antepasado, según la carne? \bibleverse{2} Porque si Abraham fue
justificado por las obras, tiene de qué jactarse, pero no ante Dios.
\bibleverse{3} Porque ¿qué dice la Escritura? ``Abraham creyó a Dios, y
le fue contado por justicia''. \footnote{\textbf{4:3} Gal 3,6}
\bibleverse{4} Ahora bien, al que trabaja, la recompensa no se le cuenta
como gracia, sino como algo debido. \footnote{\textbf{4:4} Rom 11,6}
\bibleverse{5} Pero al que no trabaja, sino que cree en el que justifica
al impío, su fe le es contada por justicia. \footnote{\textbf{4:5} Rom
  3,26} \bibleverse{6} Así como David también pronuncia la bendición
sobre el hombre a quien Dios le cuenta la justicia aparte de las obras:
\bibleverse{7} ``Bienaventurados aquellos cuyas iniquidades son
perdonadas, cuyos pecados están cubiertos. \bibleverse{8} Dichoso el
hombre al que el Señor no acusa de pecado''.

\hypertarget{abraham-como-el-padre-de-todos-los-creyentes-incluidos-los-gentiles}{%
\subsection{Abraham como el padre de todos los creyentes, incluidos los
gentiles}\label{abraham-como-el-padre-de-todos-los-creyentes-incluidos-los-gentiles}}

\bibleverse{9} Entonces, ¿se pronuncia esta bendición sólo sobre los
circuncisos, o también sobre los incircuncisos? Porque decimos que la fe
le fue contada a Abraham por justicia. \bibleverse{10} ¿Cómo, pues, le
fue contada? ¿En la circuncisión o en la incircuncisión? No en la
circuncisión, sino en la incircuncisión. \bibleverse{11} Recibió la
señal de la circuncisión, sello de la justicia de la fe que tenía
mientras estaba en la incircuncisión, para ser padre de todos los que
creen, aunque estén en la incircuncisión, a fin de que también les sea
contada la justicia. \footnote{\textbf{4:11} Gén 17,10-11}
\bibleverse{12} Él es el padre de la circuncisión para aquellos que no
sólo son de la circuncisión, sino que también caminan en los pasos de
esa fe de nuestro padre Abraham, que tuvo en la incircuncisión.
\footnote{\textbf{4:12} Mat 3,9}

\hypertarget{la-promesa-de-salvaciuxf3n-no-le-lleguxf3-a-abraham-por-la-ley-sino-por-la-fe}{%
\subsection{La promesa de salvación no le llegó a Abraham por la ley,
sino por la
fe}\label{la-promesa-de-salvaciuxf3n-no-le-lleguxf3-a-abraham-por-la-ley-sino-por-la-fe}}

\bibleverse{13} Porque la promesa hecha a Abraham y a su descendencia de
que sería heredero del mundo no fue por la ley, sino por la justicia de
la fe. \footnote{\textbf{4:13} Gén 22,17-18} \bibleverse{14} Porque si
los que son de la ley son herederos, la fe queda anulada, y la promesa
queda sin efecto. \bibleverse{15} Porque la ley produce ira; pues donde
no hay ley, tampoco hay desobediencia. \footnote{\textbf{4:15} Rom 3,20;
  Rom 5,13; Rom 7,8; Rom 7,10}

\bibleverse{16} Por eso es de fe, para que sea según la gracia, a fin de
que la promesa sea segura para toda la descendencia, no sólo para la que
es de la ley, sino también para la que es de la fe de Abraham, que es el
padre de todos nosotros. \bibleverse{17} Como está escrito: ``Te he
hecho padre de muchas naciones''. Esto es en presencia de aquel a quien
creyó: Dios, que da vida a los muertos, y llama a las cosas que no son,
como si fueran. \footnote{\textbf{4:17} Heb 11,19; 2Cor 1,9}

\hypertarget{la-fe-ejemplar-de-abraham}{%
\subsection{La fe ejemplar de Abraham}\label{la-fe-ejemplar-de-abraham}}

\bibleverse{18} En contra de la esperanza, Abraham creyó con esperanza,
a fin de llegar a ser padre de muchas naciones, según lo que se había
dicho: ``Así será tu descendencia.'' \bibleverse{19} Sin debilitarse en
la fe, no tuvo en cuenta su propio cuerpo, ya desgastado, (siendo él de
unos cien años de edad), y la mortandad del vientre de Sara. \footnote{\textbf{4:19}
  Gén 17,17} \bibleverse{20} Sin embargo, mirando la promesa de Dios, no
vaciló por la incredulidad, sino que se fortaleció por la fe, dando
gloria a Dios, \footnote{\textbf{4:20} Heb 11,11} \bibleverse{21} y
estando plenamente seguro de que lo que había prometido, también podía
cumplirlo. \bibleverse{22} Por eso también se le ``acreditó por
justicia''.

\hypertarget{tal-fe-tambiuxe9n-nos-trae-justicia-y-felicidad}{%
\subsection{Tal fe también nos trae justicia y
felicidad}\label{tal-fe-tambiuxe9n-nos-trae-justicia-y-felicidad}}

\bibleverse{23} Ahora bien, no está escrito que se le haya atribuido
sólo a él, \bibleverse{24} sino también a nosotros, a quienes se nos
atribuirá, que creemos en el que resucitó a Jesús, nuestro Señor, de
entre los muertos, \bibleverse{25} que fue entregado por nuestros
delitos y resucitó para nuestra justificación. \footnote{\textbf{4:25}
  Is 53,4-5; Rom 8,32; Rom 8,34}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{evidence-of-the-righteousness-of-faith-in-abraham-and-through-a-testimony-of-david}{%
\subsection{Evidence of the righteousness of faith in Abraham and
through a testimony of
David}\label{evidence-of-the-righteousness-of-faith-in-abraham-and-through-a-testimony-of-david}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\hypertarget{paul-and-his-followers-appear-as-true-messengers-of-christ-with-courage-truthfulness-and-divine-illumination}{%
\subsection{Paul and his followers appear as true messengers of Christ
with courage, truthfulness and divine
illumination}\label{paul-and-his-followers-appear-as-true-messengers-of-christ-with-courage-truthfulness-and-divine-illumination}}

\hypertarget{paul-knows-he-is-accountable-only-to-the-lord}{%
\subsection{Paul knows he is accountable only to the
Lord}\label{paul-knows-he-is-accountable-only-to-the-lord}}

\bibleverse{1} What then will we say that Abraham, our forefather, has
found according to the flesh? \bibleverse{2} For if Abraham was
justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not toward God.
\bibleverse{3} For what does the Scripture say? ``Abraham believed God,
and it was accounted to him for righteousness.''\footnote{\textbf{4:3}
  Genesis 15:6} \bibleverse{4} Now to him who works, the reward is not
counted as grace, but as something owed. \bibleverse{5} But to him who
doesn't work, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith
is accounted for righteousness.

\hypertarget{paul-reproaches-the-corinthians-for-their-arrogance-towards-the-suffering-of-the-apostles}{%
\subsection{Paul reproaches the Corinthians for their arrogance towards
the suffering of the
apostles}\label{paul-reproaches-the-corinthians-for-their-arrogance-towards-the-suffering-of-the-apostles}}

\bibleverse{6} Even as David also pronounces blessing on the man to whom
God counts righteousness apart from works:

\hypertarget{the-external-suffering-of-the-apostles-in-addition-to-their-trust-in-faith}{%
\subsection{The external suffering of the apostles in addition to their
trust in
faith}\label{the-external-suffering-of-the-apostles-in-addition-to-their-trust-in-faith}}

\bibleverse{7} ``Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, whose
sins are covered. \bibleverse{8} Blessed is the man whom the Lord will
by no means charge with sin.'' \footnote{\textbf{4:8} Psalm 32:1-2}

\hypertarget{abraham-as-the-father-of-all-believers-including-gentiles}{%
\subsection{Abraham as the father of all believers, including
Gentiles}\label{abraham-as-the-father-of-all-believers-including-gentiles}}

\bibleverse{9} Is this blessing then pronounced only on the circumcised,
or on the uncircumcised also? For we say that faith was accounted to
Abraham for righteousness. \bibleverse{10} How then was it counted? When
he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but
in uncircumcision. \bibleverse{11} He received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was in
uncircumcision, that he might be the father of all those who believe,
though they might be in uncircumcision, that righteousness might also be
accounted to them. \bibleverse{12} He is the father of circumcision to
those who not only are of the circumcision, but who also walk in the
steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had in
uncircumcision.

\hypertarget{the-promise-of-salvation-did-not-come-to-abraham-by-law-but-by-faith}{%
\subsection{The promise of salvation did not come to Abraham by law, but
by
faith}\label{the-promise-of-salvation-did-not-come-to-abraham-by-law-but-by-faith}}

\bibleverse{13} For the promise to Abraham and to his offspring that he
would be heir of the world wasn't through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith.

\hypertarget{pauls-reference-to-his-personal-relationship-with-the-church}{%
\subsection{Paul's reference to his personal relationship with the
church}\label{pauls-reference-to-his-personal-relationship-with-the-church}}

\bibleverse{14} For if those who are of the law are heirs, faith is made
void, and the promise is made of no effect. \bibleverse{15} For the law
produces wrath; for where there is no law, neither is there
disobedience.

\hypertarget{the-renewal-of-the-spiritual-man-takes-place-at-the-death-of-the-outer-man}{%
\subsection{The renewal of the spiritual man takes place at the death of
the outer
man}\label{the-renewal-of-the-spiritual-man-takes-place-at-the-death-of-the-outer-man}}

\bibleverse{16} For this cause it is of faith, that it may be according
to grace, to the end that the promise may be sure to all the offspring,
not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the
faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all. \bibleverse{17} As it is
written, ``I have made you a father of many nations.''\footnote{\textbf{4:17}
  Genesis 17:5} This is in the presence of him whom he believed: God,
who gives life to the dead, and calls the things that are not, as though
they were.

\hypertarget{the-exemplary-faith-of-abraham}{%
\subsection{The exemplary faith of
Abraham}\label{the-exemplary-faith-of-abraham}}

\bibleverse{18} Against hope, Abraham in hope believed, to the end that
he might become a father of many nations, according to that which had
been spoken, ``So will your offspring be.''\footnote{\textbf{4:18}
  Genesis 15:5} \bibleverse{19} Without being weakened in faith, he
didn't consider his own body, already having been worn out, (he being
about a hundred years old), and the deadness of Sarah's womb.
\bibleverse{20} Yet, looking to the promise of God, he didn't waver
through unbelief, but grew strong through faith, giving glory to God,
\bibleverse{21} and being fully assured that what he had promised, he
was also able to perform. \bibleverse{22} Therefore it also was
``credited to him for righteousness.''\footnote{\textbf{4:22} Genesis
  15:6}

\hypertarget{such-faith-also-brings-us-justice-and-happiness}{%
\subsection{Such faith also brings us justice and
happiness}\label{such-faith-also-brings-us-justice-and-happiness}}

\bibleverse{23} Now it was not written that it was accounted to him for
his sake alone, \bibleverse{24} but for our sake also, to whom it will
be accounted, who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the
dead, \bibleverse{25} who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was
raised for our justification.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-salvaciuxf3n-futura-estuxe1-garantizada-para-los-justificados-a-pesar-de-todas-las-tribulaciones-debido-al-amor-de-dios-demostrado-por-la-muerte-sacrificial-de-cristo}{%
\subsection{La salvación futura está garantizada para los justificados a
pesar de todas las tribulaciones debido al amor de Dios demostrado por
la muerte sacrificial de
Cristo}\label{la-salvaciuxf3n-futura-estuxe1-garantizada-para-los-justificados-a-pesar-de-todas-las-tribulaciones-debido-al-amor-de-dios-demostrado-por-la-muerte-sacrificial-de-cristo}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Justificados, pues, por la fe, tenemos paz para con Dios
por medio de nuestro Señor Jesucristo; \footnote{\textbf{5:1} Rom 3,24;
  Rom 3,28; Is 53,5} \bibleverse{2} por quien también tenemos acceso por
la fe a esta gracia en la que estamos. Nos alegramos en la esperanza de
la gloria de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{5:2} Juan 14,6; Efes 3,12}
\bibleverse{3} No sólo esto, sino que también nos alegramos de nuestros
sufrimientos, sabiendo que el sufrimiento produce perseverancia;
\footnote{\textbf{5:3} Sant 1,2; Sant 1,1-3} \bibleverse{4} y la
perseverancia, carácter probado; y el carácter probado, esperanza;
\footnote{\textbf{5:4} Sant 1,12} \bibleverse{5} y la esperanza no nos
defrauda, porque el amor de Dios ha sido derramado en nuestros corazones
por medio del Espíritu Santo que nos fue dado. \footnote{\textbf{5:5}
  Heb 6,18-19; Sal 22,5; Sal 25,3; Sal 25,20}

\bibleverse{6} Porque cuando aún éramos débiles, a su tiempo Cristo
murió por los impíos. \bibleverse{7} Porque difícilmente se morirá por
un justo. Sin embargo, tal vez por una persona buena alguien se atreva a
morir. \bibleverse{8} Pero Dios nos encomienda su propio amor, pues
siendo aún pecadores, Cristo murió por nosotros. \footnote{\textbf{5:8}
  Juan 3,16; 1Jn 4,10}

\bibleverse{9} Mucho más, pues, estando ahora justificados por su
sangre, seremos salvados de la ira de Dios por medio de él. \footnote{\textbf{5:9}
  Rom 1,18; Rom 2,5; Rom 2,8} \bibleverse{10} Porque si siendo enemigos,
fuimos reconciliados con Dios por la muerte de su Hijo, mucho más,
estando reconciliados, seremos salvados por su vida. \footnote{\textbf{5:10}
  Rom 8,7; Col 1,21; 2Cor 5,18}

\bibleverse{11} No sólo eso, sino que también nos alegramos en Dios por
medio de nuestro Señor Jesucristo, por quien ahora hemos recibido la
reconciliación.

\hypertarget{cristo-como-lo-opuesto-a-aduxe1n-la-gracia-que-trae-vida-inmortal-es-muxe1s-poderosa-que-el-pecado-mortal}{%
\subsection{Cristo como lo opuesto a Adán; la gracia que trae vida
inmortal es más poderosa que el pecado
mortal}\label{cristo-como-lo-opuesto-a-aduxe1n-la-gracia-que-trae-vida-inmortal-es-muxe1s-poderosa-que-el-pecado-mortal}}

\bibleverse{12} Por tanto, como el pecado entró en el mundo por un
hombre, y la muerte por el pecado, así la muerte pasó a todos los
hombres, porque todos pecaron. \footnote{\textbf{5:12} Gén 2,17; Gén
  3,19; Rom 6,23} \bibleverse{13} Porque hasta la ley, el pecado estaba
en el mundo; pero el pecado no es acusado cuando no hay ley. \footnote{\textbf{5:13}
  Rom 4,15} \bibleverse{14} Sin embargo, la muerte reinó desde Adán
hasta Moisés, incluso sobre aquellos cuyos pecados no fueron como la
desobediencia de Adán, que es una prefiguración del que había de venir.

\bibleverse{15} Pero el don gratuito no es como la transgresión. Porque
si por la transgresión de uno murieron los muchos, mucho más abundó la
gracia de Dios y el don por la gracia de un solo hombre, Jesucristo,
para los muchos. \bibleverse{16} El don no es como por uno solo que
pecó; porque el juicio vino por uno solo para condenación, pero el don
gratuito siguió a muchas transgresiones para justificación.
\bibleverse{17} Porque si por la transgresión de uno reinó la muerte por
medio de uno, mucho más reinarán en vida por medio de uno, Jesucristo,
los que reciben la abundancia de la gracia y del don de la justicia.

\bibleverse{18} Así, pues, como por una sola transgresión fueron
condenados todos los hombres, así por una sola acción de justicia fueron
justificados todos los hombres para la vida. \footnote{\textbf{5:18}
  1Cor 15,21-22} \bibleverse{19} Porque así como por la desobediencia de
un solo hombre muchos fueron hechos pecadores, así también por la
obediencia de uno, muchos serán hechos justos. \footnote{\textbf{5:19}
  Rom 3,26; Is 53,11} \bibleverse{20} La ley entró para que abundara la
transgresión; pero donde abundó el pecado, sobreabundó la gracia,
\footnote{\textbf{5:20} Rom 7,8; Rom 7,13; Gal 3,19} \bibleverse{21}
para que así como el pecado reinó en la muerte, así la gracia reine por
la justicia para vida eterna por medio de Jesucristo nuestro Señor.
\footnote{\textbf{5:21} Rom 6,23}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{serious-reprimand-for-the-tolerance-shown-by-the-community-to-a-fornicator}{%
\subsection{Serious reprimand for the tolerance shown by the community
to a
fornicator}\label{serious-reprimand-for-the-tolerance-shown-by-the-community-to-a-fornicator}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\hypertarget{future-salvation-is-guaranteed-to-the-justified-despite-all-tribulations-because-of-gods-love-demonstrated-by-christs-sacrificial-death}{%
\subsection{Future salvation is guaranteed to the justified despite all
tribulations because of God's love demonstrated by Christ's sacrificial
death}\label{future-salvation-is-guaranteed-to-the-justified-despite-all-tribulations-because-of-gods-love-demonstrated-by-christs-sacrificial-death}}

\hypertarget{pauls-hope-and-longing-for-heavenly-embodiment-and-heavenly-home}{%
\subsection{Paul's hope and longing for heavenly embodiment and heavenly
home}\label{pauls-hope-and-longing-for-heavenly-embodiment-and-heavenly-home}}

\bibleverse{1} Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ; \bibleverse{2} through whom we also
have our access by faith into this grace in which we stand. We rejoice
in hope of the glory of God. \bibleverse{3} Not only this, but we also
rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces perseverance;
\bibleverse{4} and perseverance, proven character; and proven character,
hope; \bibleverse{5} and hope doesn't disappoint us, because God's love
has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to
us.

\hypertarget{general-admonition-to-moral-purity-with-reference-to-the-sacrificial-death-of-jesus-the-passover-lamb}{%
\subsection{General admonition to moral purity with reference to the
sacrificial death of Jesus, ``the Passover
lamb''}\label{general-admonition-to-moral-purity-with-reference-to-the-sacrificial-death-of-jesus-the-passover-lamb}}

\bibleverse{6} For while we were yet weak, at the right time Christ died
for the ungodly. \bibleverse{7} For one will hardly die for a righteous
man. Yet perhaps for a good person someone would even dare to die.
\bibleverse{8} But God commends his own love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

\hypertarget{correction-of-a-corinthian-misunderstanding-about-the-warning-against-fornicators}{%
\subsection{Correction of a Corinthian misunderstanding about the
warning against
fornicators}\label{correction-of-a-corinthian-misunderstanding-about-the-warning-against-fornicators}}

\bibleverse{9} Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we will
be saved from God's wrath through him. \bibleverse{10} For if while we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son,
much more, being reconciled, we will be saved by his life.

\hypertarget{personal-comments-especially-about-your-relationship-with-the-community}{%
\subsection{Personal comments, especially about your relationship with
the
community}\label{personal-comments-especially-about-your-relationship-with-the-community}}

\bibleverse{11} Not only so, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.

\hypertarget{christ-as-the-opposite-of-adam-the-grace-that-brings-immortal-life-is-more-powerful-than-mortal-sin}{%
\subsection{Christ as the opposite of Adam; the grace that brings
immortal life is more powerful than mortal
sin}\label{christ-as-the-opposite-of-adam-the-grace-that-brings-immortal-life-is-more-powerful-than-mortal-sin}}

\bibleverse{12} Therefore, as sin entered into the world through one
man, and death through sin, so death passed to all men because all
sinned. \bibleverse{13} For until the law, sin was in the world; but sin
is not charged when there is no law.

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-peculiar-content-of-his-sermon-and-the-glory-of-his-service-of-reconciliation}{%
\subsection{Reference to the peculiar content of his sermon and the
glory of his service of
reconciliation}\label{reference-to-the-peculiar-content-of-his-sermon-and-the-glory-of-his-service-of-reconciliation}}

\bibleverse{14} Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even
over those whose sins weren't like Adam's disobedience, who is a
foreshadowing of him who was to come. \bibleverse{15} But the free gift
isn't like the trespass. For if by the trespass of the one the many
died, much more did the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the
one man, Jesus Christ, abound to the many. \bibleverse{16} The gift is
not as through one who sinned; for the judgment came by one to
condemnation, but the free gift followed many trespasses to
justification. \bibleverse{17} For if by the trespass of the one, death
reigned through the one; so much more will those who receive the
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life
through the one, Jesus Christ. \bibleverse{18} So then as through one
trespass, all men were condemned; even so through one act of
righteousness, all men were justified to life. \bibleverse{19} For as
through the one man's disobedience many were made sinners, even so
through the obedience of the one, many will be made righteous.
\bibleverse{20} The law came in that the trespass might abound; but
where sin abounded, grace abounded more exceedingly, \bibleverse{21}
that as sin reigned in death, even so grace might reign through
righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{fuimos-crucificados-con-ellos-morimos-con-ellos-sepultados-con-ellos-y-resucitamos-con-cristo-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Fuimos crucificados con ellos, morimos con ellos, sepultados
con ellos y resucitamos con Cristo
Jesús}\label{fuimos-crucificados-con-ellos-morimos-con-ellos-sepultados-con-ellos-y-resucitamos-con-cristo-jesuxfas}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} ¿Qué diremos entonces? ¿Seguiremos en el pecado, para que
la gracia abunde? \footnote{\textbf{6:1} Rom 3,5-8} \bibleverse{2} ¡Que
no sea nunca! Nosotros, que hemos muerto al pecado, ¿cómo podríamos
seguir viviendo en él? \bibleverse{3} ¿O no sabéis que todos los que
fuimos bautizados en Cristo Jesús fuimos bautizados en su muerte?
\footnote{\textbf{6:3} Gal 3,27} \bibleverse{4} Fuimos, pues, sepultados
con él por el bautismo en la muerte, para que así como Cristo resucitó
de entre los muertos por la gloria del Padre, así también nosotros
andemos en una vida nueva. \footnote{\textbf{6:4} Col 2,12; 1Pe 3,21}

\bibleverse{5} Porque si nos hemos unido a él en la semejanza de su
muerte, seremos también partícipes de su resurrección; \bibleverse{6}
sabiendo esto, que nuestro viejo hombre fue crucificado con él, para que
el cuerpo del pecado fuera eliminado, a fin de que ya no fuéramos
esclavos del pecado. \footnote{\textbf{6:6} Gal 5,24} \bibleverse{7}
Porque el que ha muerto ha sido liberado del pecado.

\hypertarget{viviendo-con-cristo-resucitado}{%
\subsection{Viviendo con Cristo
resucitado}\label{viviendo-con-cristo-resucitado}}

\bibleverse{8} Pero si hemos muerto con Cristo, creemos que también
viviremos con él, \bibleverse{9} sabiendo que Cristo, resucitado de
entre los muertos, ya no muere. La muerte ya no se enseñorea más de él.
\bibleverse{10} Porque la muerte que murió, murió para el pecado una
vez; pero la vida que vive, la vive para Dios. \footnote{\textbf{6:10}
  Heb 9,26-28} \bibleverse{11} Así pues, considérense también muertos al
pecado, pero vivos para Dios en Cristo Jesús, nuestro Señor. \footnote{\textbf{6:11}
  2Cor 5,15; 1Pe 2,24}

\hypertarget{la-amonestaciuxf3n-del-apuxf3stol-a-los-fieles-de-permanecer-en-este-conocimiento-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-y-no-seguir-sirviendo-al-pecado}{%
\subsection{La amonestación del apóstol a los fieles de permanecer en
este conocimiento de la salvación y no seguir sirviendo al
pecado}\label{la-amonestaciuxf3n-del-apuxf3stol-a-los-fieles-de-permanecer-en-este-conocimiento-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-y-no-seguir-sirviendo-al-pecado}}

\bibleverse{12} Por tanto, no dejéis que el pecado reine en vuestro
cuerpo mortal, para que lo obedezcáis en sus concupiscencias.
\footnote{\textbf{6:12} Gén 4,7} \bibleverse{13} Asimismo, no presentéis
vuestros miembros al pecado como instrumentos de injusticia, sino
presentaos a Dios como vivos de entre los muertos, y vuestros miembros
como instrumentos de justicia para Dios. \footnote{\textbf{6:13} Rom
  12,1} \bibleverse{14} Porque el pecado no se enseñoreará de vosotros,
pues no estáis bajo la ley, sino bajo la gracia. \footnote{\textbf{6:14}
  Rom 7,4-6; 1Jn 3,6}

\hypertarget{el-servicio-del-pecado-ha-dado-paso-a-la-justicia}{%
\subsection{El servicio del pecado ha dado paso a la
justicia}\label{el-servicio-del-pecado-ha-dado-paso-a-la-justicia}}

\bibleverse{15} ¿Qué, pues? ¿Pecaremos porque no estamos bajo la ley
sino bajo la gracia? ¡Que nunca sea así! \footnote{\textbf{6:15} Rom
  5,17; Rom 5,21} \bibleverse{16} ¿No sabéis que cuando os presentáis
como siervos y obedecéis a alguien, sois siervos de aquel a quien
obedecéis, ya sea del pecado a la muerte o de la obediencia a la
justicia? \footnote{\textbf{6:16} Juan 8,34} \bibleverse{17} Pero
gracias a Dios que, mientras erais siervos del pecado, os hicisteis
obedientes de corazón a esa forma de enseñanza a la que fuisteis
entregados. \bibleverse{18} Liberados del pecado, os hicisteis siervos
de la justicia. \footnote{\textbf{6:18} Juan 8,32}

\bibleverse{19} Hablo en términos humanos a causa de la debilidad de
vuestra carne; pues así como presentasteis vuestros miembros como
siervos de la inmundicia y de la maldad sobre la maldad, así ahora
presentad vuestros miembros como siervos de la justicia para la
santificación. \bibleverse{20} Porque cuando erais siervos del pecado,
estabais libres de la justicia. \bibleverse{21} ¿Qué fruto teníais
entonces en las cosas de las que ahora os avergonzáis? Porque el fin de
esas cosas es la muerte. \footnote{\textbf{6:21} Rom 8,6; Rom 8,13}
\bibleverse{22} Pero ahora, liberados del pecado y convertidos en
siervos de Dios, tenéis el fruto de la santificación y el resultado de
la vida eterna. \bibleverse{23} Porque la paga del pecado es la muerte,
pero el don gratuito de Dios es la vida eterna en Cristo Jesús, nuestro
Señor. \footnote{\textbf{6:23} Rom 5,12; Sant 1,15}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{paul-as-an-apostle-is-exemplary-for-his-self-sacrifice-and-selfless-professional-accomplishment-in-the-service-of-god}{%
\subsection{Paul, as an apostle, is exemplary for his self-sacrifice and
selfless professional accomplishment in the service of
God}\label{paul-as-an-apostle-is-exemplary-for-his-self-sacrifice-and-selfless-professional-accomplishment-in-the-service-of-god}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\hypertarget{we-were-crucified-with-them-died-with-them-buried-with-them-and-rose-with-christ-jesus}{%
\subsection{We were crucified with them, died with them, buried with
them and rose with Christ
Jesus}\label{we-were-crucified-with-them-died-with-them-buried-with-them-and-rose-with-christ-jesus}}

\hypertarget{complaint-of-litigation-in-pagan-courts-and-litigation-in-general}{%
\subsection{Complaint of litigation in pagan courts and litigation in
general}\label{complaint-of-litigation-in-pagan-courts-and-litigation-in-general}}

\bibleverse{1} What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that
grace may abound? \bibleverse{2} May it never be! We who died to sin,
how could we live in it any longer? \bibleverse{3} Or don't you know
that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into
his death? \bibleverse{4} We were buried therefore with him through
baptism into death, that just as Christ was raised from the dead through
the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.
\bibleverse{5} For if we have become united with him in the likeness of
his death, we will also be part of his resurrection; \bibleverse{6}
knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be done away with, so that we would no longer be in bondage to
sin. \bibleverse{7} For he who has died has been freed from sin.

\hypertarget{living-with-the-risen-christ}{%
\subsection{Living with the Risen
Christ}\label{living-with-the-risen-christ}}

\bibleverse{8} But if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also
live with him, \bibleverse{9} knowing that Christ, being raised from the
dead, dies no more. Death no longer has dominion over him!
\bibleverse{10} For the death that he died, he died to sin one time; but
the life that he lives, he lives to God.

\hypertarget{solemn-and-loving-petition-to-the-corinthians-for-full-restoration-of-fellowship}{%
\subsection{Solemn and loving petition to the Corinthians for full
restoration of
fellowship}\label{solemn-and-loving-petition-to-the-corinthians-for-full-restoration-of-fellowship}}

\bibleverse{11} Thus consider yourselves also to be dead to sin, but
alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

\hypertarget{the-apostles-admonition-to-the-faithful-to-abide-in-this-knowledge-of-salvation-and-no-longer-serve-sin}{%
\subsection{The apostle's admonition to the faithful to abide in this
knowledge of salvation and no longer serve
sin}\label{the-apostles-admonition-to-the-faithful-to-abide-in-this-knowledge-of-salvation-and-no-longer-serve-sin}}

\hypertarget{the-sins-of-fornication-have-nothing-to-do-with-christian-freedom-fornication-warning}{%
\subsection{The sins of fornication have nothing to do with Christian
freedom; fornication
warning}\label{the-sins-of-fornication-have-nothing-to-do-with-christian-freedom-fornication-warning}}

\bibleverse{12} Therefore don't let sin reign in your mortal body, that
you should obey it in its lusts. \bibleverse{13} Also, do not present
your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but present
yourselves to God as alive from the dead, and your members as
instruments of righteousness to God.

\hypertarget{warning-against-pagan-beings-and-demand-for-perfect-sanctification}{%
\subsection{Warning against pagan beings and demand for perfect
sanctification}\label{warning-against-pagan-beings-and-demand-for-perfect-sanctification}}

\bibleverse{14} For sin will not have dominion over you, for you are not
under law, but under grace.

\hypertarget{the-service-of-sin-has-given-way-to-justice}{%
\subsection{The service of sin has given way to
justice}\label{the-service-of-sin-has-given-way-to-justice}}

\bibleverse{15} What then? Shall we sin because we are not under law but
under grace? May it never be! \bibleverse{16} Don't you know that when
you present yourselves as servants and obey someone, you are the
servants of whomever you obey, whether of sin to death, or of obedience
to righteousness? \bibleverse{17} But thanks be to God that, whereas you
were bondservants of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that
form of teaching to which you were delivered. \bibleverse{18} Being made
free from sin, you became bondservants of righteousness. \bibleverse{19}
I speak in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh; for as you
presented your members as servants to uncleanness and to wickedness upon
wickedness, even so now present your members as servants to
righteousness for sanctification. \bibleverse{20} For when you were
servants of sin, you were free from righteousness. \bibleverse{21} What
fruit then did you have at that time in the things of which you are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. \bibleverse{22} But now,
being made free from sin and having become servants of God, you have
your fruit of sanctification and the result of eternal life.
\bibleverse{23} For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God
is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{cuando-hemos-muerto-y-resucitado-con-cristo-estamos-leguxedtimamente-libres-de-la-ley-y-estamos-obligados-a-servir-al-cristo-resucitado-creyuxe9ndonos-muertos-al-pecado}{%
\subsection{Cuando hemos muerto y resucitado con Cristo, estamos
legítimamente libres de la ley y estamos obligados a servir al Cristo
resucitado creyéndonos muertos al
pecado}\label{cuando-hemos-muerto-y-resucitado-con-cristo-estamos-leguxedtimamente-libres-de-la-ley-y-estamos-obligados-a-servir-al-cristo-resucitado-creyuxe9ndonos-muertos-al-pecado}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} ¿O acaso no sabéis, hermanos (pues hablo con hombres que
conocen la ley), que la ley se impone al hombre mientras vive?
\bibleverse{2} Porque la mujer que tiene marido está unida por la ley al
marido mientras éste vive; pero si el marido muere, queda liberada de la
ley del marido. \footnote{\textbf{7:2} 1Cor 7,39} \bibleverse{3} Así
pues, si mientras vive el marido se une a otro hombre, se la llamará
adúltera. Pero si el marido muere, ella queda libre de la ley, de modo
que no es adúltera, aunque esté unida a otro hombre. \bibleverse{4} Por
tanto, hermanos míos, también vosotros habéis sido muertos a la ley por
el cuerpo de Cristo, para que os unáis a otro, al que resucitó de entre
los muertos, a fin de que produzcamos fruto para Dios. \bibleverse{5}
Porque cuando estábamos en la carne, las pasiones pecaminosas que eran
por la ley obraban en nuestros miembros para producir frutos para la
muerte. \footnote{\textbf{7:5} Rom 6,21} \bibleverse{6} Pero ahora hemos
sido liberados de la ley, habiendo muerto a aquello en lo que estábamos
sujetos; de modo que servimos en la novedad del espíritu, y no en la
antigüedad de la letra. \footnote{\textbf{7:6} Rom 8,1-2; Rom 6,2; Rom
  6,4}

\hypertarget{el-efecto-calamitoso-de-la-ley-que-familiariza-al-hombre-con-el-pecado-y-le-da-vida-al-pecado-en-la-carne}{%
\subsection{El efecto calamitoso de la ley, que familiariza al hombre
con el pecado y le da vida al pecado en la
carne}\label{el-efecto-calamitoso-de-la-ley-que-familiariza-al-hombre-con-el-pecado-y-le-da-vida-al-pecado-en-la-carne}}

\bibleverse{7} ¿Qué diremos entonces? ¿Es la ley pecado? ¡Que nunca lo
sea! Sin embargo, yo no habría conocido el pecado si no fuera por la
ley. Pues no habría conocido la codicia si la ley no hubiera dicho: ``No
codiciarás''. \bibleverse{8} Pero el pecado, encontrando ocasión a
través del mandamiento, produjo en mí toda clase de codicia. Porque sin
la ley, el pecado está muerto. \footnote{\textbf{7:8} Rom 5,13; 1Cor
  15,56} \bibleverse{9} En otro tiempo vivía fuera de la ley, pero
cuando llegó el mandamiento, el pecado revivió y yo morí.
\bibleverse{10} El mandamiento que era para la vida, lo encontré para la
muerte; \footnote{\textbf{7:10} Sant 1,15; Lev 18,5} \bibleverse{11}
porque el pecado, encontrando ocasión por el mandamiento, me engañó, y
por él me mató. \footnote{\textbf{7:11} Heb 3,13} \bibleverse{12} Por
tanto, la ley es verdaderamente santa, y el mandamiento santo, justo y
bueno. \footnote{\textbf{7:12} 1Tim 1,8}

\bibleverse{13} ¿Acaso lo que es bueno se convirtió en muerte para mí?
¡Que nunca lo sea! Pero el pecado, para que se demuestre que es pecado,
estaba produciendo la muerte en mí por medio de lo que es bueno; para
que por medio del mandamiento el pecado se vuelva excesivamente
pecaminoso. \footnote{\textbf{7:13} Rom 5,20}

\hypertarget{la-impotencia-de-la-ley-y-de-la-buena-voluntad-ante-el-pecado-como-poder-en-la-carne}{%
\subsection{La impotencia de la ley y de la buena voluntad ante el
pecado como poder en la
carne}\label{la-impotencia-de-la-ley-y-de-la-buena-voluntad-ante-el-pecado-como-poder-en-la-carne}}

\bibleverse{14} Porque sabemos que la ley es espiritual, pero yo soy
carnal, vendido al pecado. \footnote{\textbf{7:14} Juan 3,6}
\bibleverse{15} Porque no entiendo lo que hago. Pues no practico lo que
deseo hacer; pero lo que aborrezco, eso hago. \bibleverse{16} Pero si lo
que no deseo, eso hago, consiento a la ley que sea bueno.
\bibleverse{17} Así que ya no soy yo quien lo hace, sino el pecado que
mora en mí. \bibleverse{18} Porque sé que en mí, es decir, en mi carne,
no mora nada bueno. Porque el deseo está presente en mí, pero no lo
encuentro haciendo lo que es bueno. \footnote{\textbf{7:18} Gén 6,5; Gén
  8,21} \bibleverse{19} Porque el bien que deseo, no lo hago; pero el
mal que no deseo, ese sí lo practico. \bibleverse{20} Pero si lo que no
deseo, eso hago, ya no soy yo quien lo hace, sino el pecado que mora en
mí. \bibleverse{21} Encuentro, pues, la ley de que, mientras deseo hacer
el bien, el mal está presente. \bibleverse{22} Porque me deleito en la
ley de Dios según la persona interior, \bibleverse{23} pero veo una ley
diferente en mis miembros, que se opone a la ley de mi mente, y me lleva
cautivo bajo la ley del pecado que está en mis miembros. \footnote{\textbf{7:23}
  Gal 5,17} \bibleverse{24} ¡Qué miserable soy! ¿Quién me librará del
cuerpo de esta muerte? \bibleverse{25} ¡Doy gracias a Dios por
Jesucristo, nuestro Señor! Así que con la mente, yo mismo sirvo a la ley
de Dios, pero con la carne, a la ley del pecado. \footnote{\textbf{7:25}
  1Cor 15,57}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-value-and-needs-of-marriage-and-married-life-in-general}{%
\subsection{The value and needs of marriage and married life in
general}\label{the-value-and-needs-of-marriage-and-married-life-in-general}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\hypertarget{when-we-have-died-and-risen-with-christ-we-are-legitimately-free-from-the-law-and-we-are-obligated-to-serve-the-risen-christ-believing-ourselves-dead-to-sin}{%
\subsection{When we have died and risen with Christ, we are legitimately
free from the law and we are obligated to serve the risen Christ
believing ourselves dead to
sin}\label{when-we-have-died-and-risen-with-christ-we-are-legitimately-free-from-the-law-and-we-are-obligated-to-serve-the-risen-christ-believing-ourselves-dead-to-sin}}

\bibleverse{1} Or don't you know, brothers\footnote{\textbf{7:1} The
  word for ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be
  correctly translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} (for I
speak to men who know the law), that the law has dominion over a man for
as long as he lives?

\hypertarget{the-request-of-the-apostle-of-love-affirmation-of-love-and-testimony-of-trust}{%
\subsection{The request of the apostle of love, affirmation of love and
testimony of
trust}\label{the-request-of-the-apostle-of-love-affirmation-of-love-and-testimony-of-trust}}

\bibleverse{2} For the woman that has a husband is bound by law to the
husband while he lives, but if the husband dies, she is discharged from
the law of the husband. \bibleverse{3} So then if, while the husband
lives, she is joined to another man, she would be called an adulteress.
But if the husband dies, she is free from the law, so that she is no
adulteress, though she is joined to another man. \bibleverse{4}
Therefore, my brothers, you also were made dead to the law through the
body of Christ, that you would be joined to another, to him who was
raised from the dead, that we might produce fruit to God.

\hypertarget{joy-of-the-apostle-for-the-arrival-and-message-of-titus}{%
\subsection{Joy of the apostle for the arrival and message of
Titus}\label{joy-of-the-apostle-for-the-arrival-and-message-of-titus}}

\bibleverse{5} For when we were in the flesh, the sinful passions which
were through the law worked in our members to bring out fruit to death.
\bibleverse{6} But now we have been discharged from the law, having died
to that in which we were held; so that we serve in newness of the
spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.

\hypertarget{the-calamitous-effect-of-the-law-which-familiarizes-man-with-sin-and-gives-life-to-sin-in-the-flesh}{%
\subsection{The calamitous effect of the law, which familiarizes man
with sin and gives life to sin in the
flesh}\label{the-calamitous-effect-of-the-law-which-familiarizes-man-with-sin-and-gives-life-to-sin-in-the-flesh}}

\bibleverse{7} What shall we say then? Is the law sin? May it never be!
However, I wouldn't have known sin except through the law. For I
wouldn't have known coveting unless the law had said, ``You shall not
covet.''\footnote{\textbf{7:7} Exodus 20:17; Deuteronomy 5:21}

\hypertarget{the-apostles-joy-at-the-salutary-effect-of-the-penal-letter-at-the-fully-restored-understanding-and-at-the-favorable-report-of-titus}{%
\subsection{The apostle's joy at the salutary effect of the penal
letter, at the fully restored understanding, and at the favorable report
of
Titus}\label{the-apostles-joy-at-the-salutary-effect-of-the-penal-letter-at-the-fully-restored-understanding-and-at-the-favorable-report-of-titus}}

\hypertarget{on-the-behavior-of-single-people-and-on-divorce-in-christian-marriages}{%
\subsection{On the behavior of single people and on divorce in Christian
marriages}\label{on-the-behavior-of-single-people-and-on-divorce-in-christian-marriages}}

\bibleverse{8} But sin, finding occasion through the commandment,
produced in me all kinds of coveting. For apart from the law, sin is
dead. \bibleverse{9} I was alive apart from the law once, but when the
commandment came, sin revived and I died. \bibleverse{10} The
commandment which was for life, this I found to be for death;
\bibleverse{11} for sin, finding occasion through the commandment,
deceived me, and through it killed me.

\hypertarget{behavior-in-mixed-marriage}{%
\subsection{Behavior in mixed
marriage}\label{behavior-in-mixed-marriage}}

\bibleverse{12} Therefore the law indeed is holy, and the commandment
holy, righteous, and good. \bibleverse{13} Did then that which is good
become death to me? May it never be! But sin, that it might be shown to
be sin, was producing death in me through that which is good; that
through the commandment sin might become exceedingly sinful.

\hypertarget{the-impotence-of-the-law-and-of-good-will-in-the-face-of-sin-as-power-in-the-flesh}{%
\subsection{The impotence of the law and of good will in the face of sin
as power in the
flesh}\label{the-impotence-of-the-law-and-of-good-will-in-the-face-of-sin-as-power-in-the-flesh}}

\bibleverse{14} For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am fleshly,
sold under sin. \bibleverse{15} For I don't understand what I am doing.
For I don't practice what I desire to do; but what I hate, that I do.
\bibleverse{16} But if what I don't desire, that I do, I consent to the
law that it is good.

\hypertarget{general-rule-about-the-position-of-the-christian-to-existing-external-conditions-every-believer-remains-in-the-position-in-which-he-was-called}{%
\subsection{General rule about the position of the Christian to existing
external conditions: Every believer remains in the position in which he
was
called!}\label{general-rule-about-the-position-of-the-christian-to-existing-external-conditions-every-believer-remains-in-the-position-in-which-he-was-called}}

\bibleverse{17} So now it is no more I that do it, but sin which dwells
in me. \bibleverse{18} For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh,
dwells no good thing. For desire is present with me, but I don't find it
doing that which is good. \bibleverse{19} For the good which I desire, I
don't do; but the evil which I don't desire, that I practice.
\bibleverse{20} But if what I don't desire, that I do, it is no more I
that do it, but sin which dwells in me. \bibleverse{21} I find then the
law that, while I desire to do good, evil is present. \bibleverse{22}
For I delight in God's law after the inward person, \bibleverse{23} but
I see a different law in my members, warring against the law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity under the law of sin which is in my
members. \bibleverse{24} What a wretched man I am! Who will deliver me
out of the body of this death?

\hypertarget{on-celibacy-of-both-sexes-tips-for-marrying-single-women-and-remarrying-widows}{%
\subsection{On celibacy of both sexes; Tips for marrying single women
and remarrying
widows}\label{on-celibacy-of-both-sexes-tips-for-marrying-single-women-and-remarrying-widows}}

\bibleverse{25} I thank God through Jesus Christ, our Lord! So then with
the mind, I myself serve God's law, but with the flesh, sin's law.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-cristiano-estuxe1-bajo-la-ley-del-espuxedritu}{%
\subsection{El cristiano está bajo la ley del
Espíritu}\label{el-cristiano-estuxe1-bajo-la-ley-del-espuxedritu}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} Ahora, pues, no hay condenación para los que están en
Cristo Jesús, que no andan según la carne, sino según el Espíritu.
\footnote{\textbf{8:1} Rom 8,33-34} \bibleverse{2} Porque la ley del
Espíritu de vida en Cristo Jesús me hizo libre de la ley del pecado y de
la muerte. \bibleverse{3} Porque lo que la ley no pudo hacer, por cuanto
era débil por la carne, Dios lo hizo, enviando a su propio Hijo en
semejanza de carne de pecado y por el pecado, condenó al pecado en la
carne, \footnote{\textbf{8:3} Hech 13,38; Hech 15,10; Heb 2,17}
\bibleverse{4} para que la ordenanza de la ley se cumpliera en nosotros,
que no andamos según la carne, sino según el Espíritu. \footnote{\textbf{8:4}
  Gal 5,16; Gal 5,25}

\hypertarget{el-contraste-entre-los-que-sirven-a-dios-en-el-espuxedritu-y-los-que-viven-por-los-instintos-de-la-carne}{%
\subsection{El contraste entre los que sirven a Dios en el Espíritu y
los que viven por los instintos de la
carne}\label{el-contraste-entre-los-que-sirven-a-dios-en-el-espuxedritu-y-los-que-viven-por-los-instintos-de-la-carne}}

\bibleverse{5} Porque los que viven según la carne ponen su mente en las
cosas de la carne, pero los que viven según el Espíritu, en las cosas
del Espíritu. \bibleverse{6} Porque la mente de la carne es muerte, pero
la mente del Espíritu es vida y paz; \footnote{\textbf{8:6} Rom 6,21;
  Gal 6,8} \bibleverse{7} porque la mente de la carne es hostil a Dios,
pues no se sujeta a la ley de Dios, ni tampoco puede hacerlo.
\footnote{\textbf{8:7} Sant 4,4} \bibleverse{8} Los que están en la
carne no pueden agradar a Dios.

\hypertarget{el-cristiano-como-morada-del-espuxedritu}{%
\subsection{El cristiano como morada del
Espíritu}\label{el-cristiano-como-morada-del-espuxedritu}}

\bibleverse{9} Pero no estáis en la carne, sino en el Espíritu, si es
que el Espíritu de Dios habita en vosotros. Pero si alguno no tiene el
Espíritu de Cristo, no es suyo. \bibleverse{10} Si Cristo está en
vosotros, el cuerpo está muerto a causa del pecado, pero el espíritu
está vivo a causa de la justicia. \footnote{\textbf{8:10} Gal 2,20}
\bibleverse{11} Pero si el Espíritu del que resucitó a Jesús de entre
los muertos habita en vosotros, el que resucitó a Cristo Jesús de entre
los muertos también dará vida a vuestros cuerpos mortales por medio de
su Espíritu que habita en vosotros.

\hypertarget{la-posesiuxf3n-del-espuxedritu-garantiza-la-redenciuxf3n-fuxedsica-de-los-hijos-de-dios-si-soportan-los-sufrimientos-de-este-tiempo}{%
\subsection{La posesión del espíritu garantiza la redención física de
los hijos de Dios si soportan los sufrimientos de este
tiempo}\label{la-posesiuxf3n-del-espuxedritu-garantiza-la-redenciuxf3n-fuxedsica-de-los-hijos-de-dios-si-soportan-los-sufrimientos-de-este-tiempo}}

\bibleverse{12} Así que, hermanos, somos deudores, no de la carne, para
vivir según la carne. \footnote{\textbf{8:12} Rom 6,7; Rom 6,18}
\bibleverse{13} Porque si vivís según la carne, debéis morir; pero si
por el Espíritu hacéis morir las obras del cuerpo, viviréis. \footnote{\textbf{8:13}
  Rom 7,24; Gal 6,8; Efes 4,22-24} \bibleverse{14} Porque todos los que
son guiados por el Espíritu de Dios, éstos son hijos de Dios.
\bibleverse{15} Porque no habéis recibido el espíritu de esclavitud para
el temor, sino que habéis recibido el Espíritu de adopción, por el cual
clamamos: ``¡Abba! Padre!'' \footnote{\textbf{8:15} 2Tim 1,7; Gal 4,5-6}

\bibleverse{16} El Espíritu mismo da testimonio a nuestro espíritu de
que somos hijos de Dios; \footnote{\textbf{8:16} 2Cor 1,22}
\bibleverse{17} y si hijos, también herederos, herederos de Dios y
coherederos con Cristo, si es que sufrimos con él, para que también
seamos glorificados con él. \footnote{\textbf{8:17} Gal 4,7; Apoc 21,7}

\bibleverse{18} Porque considero que los sufrimientos de este tiempo no
son dignos de compararse con la gloria que se nos revelará. \footnote{\textbf{8:18}
  2Cor 4,17} \bibleverse{19} Porque la creación espera con ansia que se
manifiesten los hijos de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{8:19} Col 3,4; 1Jn 3,2}
\bibleverse{20} Porque la creación fue sometida a la vanidad, no por su
propia voluntad, sino por causa del que la sometió, en la esperanza
\footnote{\textbf{8:20} Gén 3,17; Ecl 1,2} \bibleverse{21} de que
también la creación misma será liberada de la esclavitud de la
decadencia a la libertad de la gloria de los hijos de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{8:21}
  2Pe 3,13} \bibleverse{22} Porque sabemos que toda la creación gime y
sufre dolores hasta ahora. \bibleverse{23} No sólo eso, sino que
nosotros mismos, que tenemos las primicias del Espíritu, también gemimos
en nuestro interior, esperando la adopción, la redención de nuestro
cuerpo. \footnote{\textbf{8:23} 2Cor 5,2} \bibleverse{24} Porque fuimos
salvados en la esperanza, pero la esperanza que se ve no es esperanza.
Porque ¿quién espera lo que ve? \footnote{\textbf{8:24} 2Cor 5,7}
\bibleverse{25} Pero si esperamos lo que no vemos, lo esperamos con
paciencia. \footnote{\textbf{8:25} Gal 5,5}

\bibleverse{26} Del mismo modo, el Espíritu también ayuda a nuestras
debilidades, pues no sabemos orar como es debido. Pero el Espíritu mismo
intercede por nosotros con gemidos indecibles. \bibleverse{27} El que
escudriña los corazones sabe lo que piensa el Espíritu, porque intercede
por los santos según Dios.

\hypertarget{el-comienzo-de-nuestra-comuniuxf3n-con-dios-obra-de-dios-garantiza-su-finalizaciuxf3n-final}{%
\subsection{El comienzo de nuestra comunión con Dios, obra de Dios,
garantiza su finalización
final}\label{el-comienzo-de-nuestra-comuniuxf3n-con-dios-obra-de-dios-garantiza-su-finalizaciuxf3n-final}}

\bibleverse{28} Sabemos que todas las cosas cooperan para el bien de los
que aman a Dios, de los que son llamados según su propósito. \footnote{\textbf{8:28}
  Efes 1,11} \bibleverse{29} Porque a los que conoció de antemano,
también los predestinó a ser conformes a la imagen de su Hijo, para que
fuera el primogénito entre muchos hermanos. \footnote{\textbf{8:29} Col
  1,18; Heb 1,6} \bibleverse{30} A los que predestinó, también los
llamó. A los que llamó, también los justificó. A los que justificó,
también los glorificó. \footnote{\textbf{8:30} Rom 3,26; 2Tes 2,13-14}

\hypertarget{por-tanto-nuestro-estado-de-salvaciuxf3n-estuxe1-divinamente-asegurado-contra-todos-los-poderes-y-nuestra-certeza-de-fe-y-seguridad-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-estuxe1-justificada}{%
\subsection{Por tanto, nuestro estado de salvación está divinamente
asegurado contra todos los poderes y nuestra certeza de fe y seguridad
de la salvación está
justificada}\label{por-tanto-nuestro-estado-de-salvaciuxf3n-estuxe1-divinamente-asegurado-contra-todos-los-poderes-y-nuestra-certeza-de-fe-y-seguridad-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-estuxe1-justificada}}

\bibleverse{31} ¿Qué diremos, pues, de estas cosas? Si Dios está a favor
de nosotros, ¿quién puede estar en contra? \footnote{\textbf{8:31} Sal
  118,6} \bibleverse{32} El que no perdonó a su propio Hijo, sino que lo
entregó por todos nosotros, ¿cómo no va a darnos también con él todas
las cosas? \footnote{\textbf{8:32} Juan 3,16} \bibleverse{33} ¿Quién
podría acusar a los elegidos de Dios? Es Dios quien justifica.
\bibleverse{34} ¿Quién es el que condena? Es Cristo que murió, más aún,
que resucitó de entre los muertos, que está a la derecha de Dios, que
también intercede por nosotros. \footnote{\textbf{8:34} 1Jn 2,1; Heb
  7,25}

\bibleverse{35} ¿Quién nos separará del amor de Cristo? ¿Podrá la
opresión, o la angustia, o la persecución, o el hambre, o la desnudez, o
el peligro, o la espada? \bibleverse{36} Como está escrito, ``Por tu
causa nos matan todo el día. Fuimos contados como ovejas para el
matadero''. \footnote{\textbf{8:36} 2Cor 4,11} \bibleverse{37} No, en
todas estas cosas somos más que vencedores por medio de aquel que nos
amó. \footnote{\textbf{8:37} 1Jn 5,4} \bibleverse{38} Porque estoy
convencido de que ni la muerte, ni la vida, ni los ángeles, ni los
principados, ni lo presente, ni lo futuro, ni las potencias, \footnote{\textbf{8:38}
  Efes 6,12} \bibleverse{39} ni la altura, ni la profundidad, ni ninguna
otra cosa creada podrá separarnos del amor de Dios que está en Cristo
Jesús, nuestro Señor.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are
in Christ Jesus, who don't walk according to the flesh, but according to
the Spirit.\footnote{\textbf{8:1} NU omits ``who don't walk according to
  the flesh, but according to the Spirit''} \bibleverse{2} For the law
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin
and of death. \bibleverse{3} For what the law couldn't do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God did, sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh,
\bibleverse{4} that the ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us
who don't walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
\bibleverse{5} For those who live according to the flesh set their minds
on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit,
the things of the Spirit. \bibleverse{6} For the mind of the flesh is
death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace; \bibleverse{7}
because the mind of the flesh is hostile toward God, for it is not
subject to God's law, neither indeed can it be. \bibleverse{8} Those who
are in the flesh can't please God. \bibleverse{9} But you are not in the
flesh but in the Spirit, if it is so that the Spirit of God dwells in
you. But if any man doesn't have the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.
\bibleverse{10} If Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin,
but the spirit is alive because of righteousness. \bibleverse{11} But if
the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he
who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your
mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you. \bibleverse{12} So
then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh. \bibleverse{13} For if you live after the flesh, you must die;
but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will
live. \bibleverse{14} For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these
are children of God. \bibleverse{15} For you didn't receive the spirit
of bondage again to fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by
whom we cry, ``Abba!\footnote{\textbf{8:15} Abba is an Aramaic word for
  ``Father'' or ``Daddy'', which can be used affectionately and
  respectfully in prayer to our Father in heaven.} Father!''
\bibleverse{16} The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are
children of God; \bibleverse{17} and if children, then heirs---heirs of
God and joint heirs with Christ, if indeed we suffer with him, that we
may also be glorified with him. \bibleverse{18} For I consider that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which will be revealed toward us. \bibleverse{19} For the creation
waits with eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed.
\bibleverse{20} For the creation was subjected to vanity, not of its own
will, but because of him who subjected it, in hope \bibleverse{21} that
the creation itself also will be delivered from the bondage of decay
into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. \bibleverse{22}
For we know that the whole creation groans and travails in pain together
until now. \bibleverse{23} Not only so, but ourselves also, who have the
first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
waiting for adoption, the redemption of our body. \bibleverse{24} For we
were saved in hope, but hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for
that which he sees? \bibleverse{25} But if we hope for that which we
don't see, we wait for it with patience. \bibleverse{26} In the same
way, the Spirit also helps our weaknesses, for we don't know how to pray
as we ought. But the Spirit himself makes intercession for us with
groanings which can't be uttered. \bibleverse{27} He who searches the
hearts knows what is on the Spirit's mind, because he makes intercession
for the saints according to God. \bibleverse{28} We know that all things
work together for good for those who love God, for those who are called
according to his purpose. \bibleverse{29} For whom he foreknew, he also
predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be
the firstborn among many brothers.\footnote{\textbf{8:29} The word for
  ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be correctly
  translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} \bibleverse{30}
Whom he predestined, those he also called. Whom he called, those he also
justified. Whom he justified, those he also glorified. \bibleverse{31}
What then shall we say about these things? If God is for us, who can be
against us? \bibleverse{32} He who didn't spare his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how would he not also with him freely give
us all things? \bibleverse{33} Who could bring a charge against God's
chosen ones? It is God who justifies. \bibleverse{34} Who is he who
condemns? It is Christ who died, yes rather, who was raised from the
dead, who is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. \bibleverse{35} Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Could
oppression, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? \bibleverse{36} Even as it is written, ``For your sake
we are killed all day long. We were accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.''\footnote{\textbf{8:36} Psalm 44:22} \bibleverse{37} No, in
all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
\bibleverse{38} For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
powers,

\hypertarget{about-remarriage-of-widows}{%
\subsection{About remarriage of
widows}\label{about-remarriage-of-widows}}

\hypertarget{the-christian-is-under-the-law-of-the-spirit}{%
\subsection{The Christian is under the law of the
Spirit}\label{the-christian-is-under-the-law-of-the-spirit}}

\hypertarget{the-gratifying-exemplary-success-of-the-collection-with-macedonian-communities}{%
\subsection{The gratifying (exemplary) success of the collection with
Macedonian
communities}\label{the-gratifying-exemplary-success-of-the-collection-with-macedonian-communities}}

\hypertarget{knowledge-itself-has-less-value-than-love}{%
\subsection{Knowledge itself has less value than
love}\label{knowledge-itself-has-less-value-than-love}}

\hypertarget{not-everyone-has-perfect-knowledge}{%
\subsection{Not everyone has perfect
knowledge}\label{not-everyone-has-perfect-knowledge}}

\hypertarget{the-contrast-between-those-who-serve-god-in-the-spirit-and-those-who-live-by-the-instincts-of-the-flesh}{%
\subsection{The contrast between those who serve God in the Spirit and
those who live by the instincts of the
flesh}\label{the-contrast-between-those-who-serve-god-in-the-spirit-and-those-who-live-by-the-instincts-of-the-flesh}}

\hypertarget{invitation-to-the-corinthians-to-actively-participate-in-the-collection}{%
\subsection{Invitation to the Corinthians to actively participate in the
collection}\label{invitation-to-the-corinthians-to-actively-participate-in-the-collection}}

\hypertarget{for-the-use-of-christian-liberty-loving-consideration-for-the-weak-is-decisive}{%
\subsection{For the use of Christian liberty, loving consideration for
the weak is
decisive}\label{for-the-use-of-christian-liberty-loving-consideration-for-the-weak-is-decisive}}

\hypertarget{the-christian-as-the-abode-of-the-spirit}{%
\subsection{The Christian as the abode of the
Spirit}\label{the-christian-as-the-abode-of-the-spirit}}

\hypertarget{the-possession-of-the-spirit-guarantees-the-physical-redemption-of-the-children-of-god-if-they-endure-the-sufferings-of-this-time}{%
\subsection{The possession of the spirit guarantees the physical
redemption of the children of God if they endure the sufferings of this
time}\label{the-possession-of-the-spirit-guarantees-the-physical-redemption-of-the-children-of-god-if-they-endure-the-sufferings-of-this-time}}

\hypertarget{recommendation-of-tito-and-the-other-two-deputies-of-pablo}{%
\subsection{Recommendation of Tito and the other two deputies of
Pablo}\label{recommendation-of-tito-and-the-other-two-deputies-of-pablo}}

\hypertarget{the-beginning-of-our-communion-with-god-gods-work-guarantees-its-final-completion}{%
\subsection{The beginning of our communion with God, God's work,
guarantees its final
completion}\label{the-beginning-of-our-communion-with-god-gods-work-guarantees-its-final-completion}}

\hypertarget{therefore-our-state-of-salvation-is-divinely-assured-against-all-powers-and-our-certainty-of-faith-and-assurance-of-salvation-is-justified}{%
\subsection{Therefore our state of salvation is divinely assured against
all powers and our certainty of faith and assurance of salvation is
justified}\label{therefore-our-state-of-salvation-is-divinely-assured-against-all-powers-and-our-certainty-of-faith-and-assurance-of-salvation-is-justified}}

\bibleverse{39} nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing will
be able to separate us from God's love which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{introducciuxf3n-el-profundo-dolor-del-apuxf3stol-por-la-exclusiuxf3n-temporal-de-su-pueblo-de-la-salvaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Introducción: El profundo dolor del apóstol por la exclusión
temporal de su pueblo de la
salvación}\label{introducciuxf3n-el-profundo-dolor-del-apuxf3stol-por-la-exclusiuxf3n-temporal-de-su-pueblo-de-la-salvaciuxf3n}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} Digo la verdad en Cristo. No miento, pues mi conciencia
testifica conmigo en el Espíritu Santo \bibleverse{2} que tengo una gran
pena y un dolor incesante en mi corazón. \bibleverse{3} Porque desearía
ser yo mismo separado de Cristo por mis hermanos, mis parientes según la
carne \footnote{\textbf{9:3} Éxod 32,32} \bibleverse{4} que son
israelitas; de los cuales es la adopción, la gloria, las alianzas, la
entrega de la ley, el servicio y las promesas; \footnote{\textbf{9:4}
  Éxod 4,22; Deut 7,6; Gén 17,7; Éxod 20,1; Éxod 40,34} \bibleverse{5}
de los cuales son los padres, y de los cuales es Cristo en cuanto a la
carne, que es sobre todo, Dios, bendito por siempre. Amén. \footnote{\textbf{9:5}
  Mat 1,1; Luc 3,23-34; Juan 1,1; Rom 1,3}

\hypertarget{las-promesas-de-dios-a-israel-son-inquebrantables-pero-no-se-aplican-a-todo-el-cuerpo-sino-solo-a-los-descendientes-espirituales-de-abraham}{%
\subsection{Las promesas de Dios a Israel son inquebrantables, pero no
se aplican a todo el cuerpo, sino solo a los descendientes espirituales
de
Abraham}\label{las-promesas-de-dios-a-israel-son-inquebrantables-pero-no-se-aplican-a-todo-el-cuerpo-sino-solo-a-los-descendientes-espirituales-de-abraham}}

\bibleverse{6} Pero no es que la palabra de Dios haya quedado en nada.
Porque no todos los que son de Israel son de Israel. \footnote{\textbf{9:6}
  Núm 23,19; Rom 2,28} \bibleverse{7} Tampoco, por ser descendientes de
Abraham, son todos hijos. Pero, ``su descendencia será contada como de
Isaac''. \bibleverse{8} Es decir, no son los hijos de la carne los que
son hijos de Dios, sino que son contados como herederos los hijos de la
promesa. \footnote{\textbf{9:8} Gal 4,23} \bibleverse{9} Porque esta es
una palabra de promesa: ``Al tiempo señalado vendré, y Sara tendrá un
hijo.'' \bibleverse{10} No sólo eso, sino que Rebeca también concibió
por uno, por nuestro padre Isaac. \bibleverse{11} Porque no habiendo
nacido aún, ni habiendo hecho nada bueno o malo, para que el propósito
de Dios según la elección se mantenga, no por las obras, sino por el que
llama, \bibleverse{12} se le dijo: ``El mayor servirá al menor.''
\bibleverse{13} Como está escrito: ``A Jacob lo amé, pero a Esaú lo
aborrecí''.

\hypertarget{la-elecciuxf3n-para-la-salvaciuxf3n-es-obra-gratuita-de-la-gracia-de-dios-la-negaciuxf3n-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-y-la-gracia-no-permite-al-hombre-pelear-con-dios}{%
\subsection{La elección para la salvación es obra gratuita de la gracia
de Dios; la negación de la salvación y la gracia no permite al hombre
pelear con
Dios}\label{la-elecciuxf3n-para-la-salvaciuxf3n-es-obra-gratuita-de-la-gracia-de-dios-la-negaciuxf3n-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-y-la-gracia-no-permite-al-hombre-pelear-con-dios}}

\bibleverse{14} ¿Qué diremos entonces? ¿Hay injusticia con Dios? ¡Que
nunca la haya! \bibleverse{15} Porque dijo a Moisés: ``Tendré
misericordia del que tenga misericordia, y me compadeceré del que me
compadezca''. \bibleverse{16} Así que no es del que quiere, ni del que
corre, sino de Dios que tiene misericordia. \footnote{\textbf{9:16} Efes
  2,8} \bibleverse{17} Porque la Escritura dice al Faraón: ``Para esto
mismo te hice levantar, para mostrar en ti mi poder, y para que mi
nombre sea proclamado en toda la tierra.'' \bibleverse{18} Así, pues,
tiene misericordia de quien quiere, y endurece a quien quiere.
\footnote{\textbf{9:18} Éxod 4,21; 1Pe 2,8}

\bibleverse{19} Me diréis entonces: ``¿Por qué sigue encontrando fallos?
Porque ¿quién resiste su voluntad?'' \bibleverse{20} Pero en verdad, oh
hombre, ¿quién eres tú para replicar contra Dios? ¿Acaso la cosa formada
le preguntará a quien la formó: ``Por qué me hiciste así''? \footnote{\textbf{9:20}
  Is 45,9} \bibleverse{21} ¿O acaso el alfarero no tiene derecho sobre
el barro, para hacer de la misma masa una parte para la honra y otra
para la deshonra? \bibleverse{22} ¿Y si Dios, queriendo mostrar su ira y
dar a conocer su poder, soportó con mucha paciencia vasos de ira
preparados para la destrucción, \footnote{\textbf{9:22} Rom 2,4; Prov
  16,4} \bibleverse{23} y para dar a conocer las riquezas de su gloria
en vasos de misericordia, que preparó de antemano para la gloria,
\footnote{\textbf{9:23} Rom 8,29; Efes 1,3-12} \bibleverse{24} nosotros,
a quienes también llamó, no sólo de los judíos, sino también de los
gentiles? \bibleverse{25} Como dice también en Oseas, ``Los llamaré `mi
pueblo', que no era mi pueblo; y su ``amado'', que no era amado''.
\bibleverse{26} ``Será que en el lugar donde se les dijo: `Ustedes no
son mi pueblo'allí serán llamados `hijos del Dios vivo'\,''.

\bibleverse{27} Isaías clama por Israel, ``Si el número de los hijos de
Israel es como la arena del mar, es el remanente el que se salvará;
\footnote{\textbf{9:27} Rom 11,5} \bibleverse{28} porque él terminará la
obra y la cortará en justicia, porque el Señor hará una obra corta sobre
la tierra''.

\bibleverse{29} Como ya dijo Isaías, ``A menos que el Señor de los
Ejércitos nos haya dejado una semilla, nos habríamos vuelto como Sodoma,
y se hubiera hecho como Gomorra''.

\hypertarget{la-culpa-de-los-juduxedos-consistiuxf3-en-el-rechazo-de-la-justicia-de-la-fe-y-en-la-persecuciuxf3n-excesiva-de-la-justicia-de-las-obras}{%
\subsection{La culpa de los judíos consistió en el rechazo de la
justicia de la fe y en la persecución excesiva de la justicia de las
obras}\label{la-culpa-de-los-juduxedos-consistiuxf3-en-el-rechazo-de-la-justicia-de-la-fe-y-en-la-persecuciuxf3n-excesiva-de-la-justicia-de-las-obras}}

\bibleverse{30} ¿Qué diremos entonces? Que los gentiles, que no seguían
la justicia, alcanzaron la justicia, la justicia que es de la fe;
\footnote{\textbf{9:30} Rom 10,20} \bibleverse{31} pero Israel,
siguiendo una ley de justicia, no llegó a la ley de justicia.
\footnote{\textbf{9:31} Rom 10,2-3} \bibleverse{32} ¿Por qué? Porque no
la buscaron por la fe, sino como por las obras de la ley. Tropezaron con
la piedra de tropiezo, \bibleverse{33} como está escrito, ``He aquí que
pongo en Sión una piedra de tropiezo y una roca de ofensa; y nadie que
crea en él quedará decepcionado''. \footnote{\textbf{9:33} Mat 21,42;
  Mat 21,44; 1Pe 2,8}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{explanation-and-justification-of-the-rights-due-to-paul-as-an-apostle}{%
\subsection{Explanation and justification of the rights due to Paul as
an
apostle}\label{explanation-and-justification-of-the-rights-due-to-paul-as-an-apostle}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\hypertarget{what-paul-has-so-far-praised-of-the-corinthians-and-now-expects-and-what-reasons-have-determined-him-to-send-the-brothers-ahead}{%
\subsection{What Paul has so far praised of the Corinthians and now
expects and what reasons have determined him to send the brothers
ahead}\label{what-paul-has-so-far-praised-of-the-corinthians-and-now-expects-and-what-reasons-have-determined-him-to-send-the-brothers-ahead}}

\hypertarget{introduction-the-deep-sorrow-of-the-apostle-for-the-temporary-exclusion-of-his-people-from-salvation}{%
\subsection{Introduction: The deep sorrow of the apostle for the
temporary exclusion of his people from
salvation}\label{introduction-the-deep-sorrow-of-the-apostle-for-the-temporary-exclusion-of-his-people-from-salvation}}

\bibleverse{1} I tell the truth in Christ. I am not lying, my conscience
testifying with me in the Holy Spirit \bibleverse{2} that I have great
sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart. \bibleverse{3} For I could wish
that I myself were accursed from Christ for my brothers' sake, my
relatives according to the flesh \bibleverse{4} who are Israelites;
whose is the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law,
the service, and the promises; \bibleverse{5} of whom are the fathers,
and from whom is Christ as concerning the flesh, who is over all, God,
blessed forever. Amen.

\hypertarget{gods-promises-to-israel-are-unbreakable-but-they-do-not-apply-to-the-whole-body-but-only-to-the-spiritual-descendants-of-abraham}{%
\subsection{God's promises to Israel are unbreakable, but they do not
apply to the whole body, but only to the spiritual descendants of
Abraham}\label{gods-promises-to-israel-are-unbreakable-but-they-do-not-apply-to-the-whole-body-but-only-to-the-spiritual-descendants-of-abraham}}

\hypertarget{another-invitation-to-actively-participate-in-the-collection-in-reference-to-the-beneficial-effects-of-labor-of-love}{%
\subsection{Another invitation to actively participate in the collection
in reference to the beneficial effects of labor of
love}\label{another-invitation-to-actively-participate-in-the-collection-in-reference-to-the-beneficial-effects-of-labor-of-love}}

\bibleverse{6} But it is not as though the word of God has come to
nothing. For they are not all Israel that are of Israel. \bibleverse{7}
Neither, because they are Abraham's offspring, are they all children.
But, ``your offspring will be accounted as from Isaac.''\footnote{\textbf{9:7}
  Genesis 21:12} \bibleverse{8} That is, it is not the children of the
flesh who are children of God, but the children of the promise are
counted as heirs. \bibleverse{9} For this is a word of promise: ``At the
appointed time I will come, and Sarah will have a son.''\footnote{\textbf{9:9}
  Genesis 18:10,14} \bibleverse{10} Not only so, but Rebekah also
conceived by one, by our father Isaac. \bibleverse{11} For being not yet
born, neither having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him who
calls,\footnote{\textbf{9:11} NU puts the phrase ``not of works, but of
  him who calls'' at the beginning of verse 12 instead of the end of
  verse 11.} \bibleverse{12} it was said to her, ``The elder will serve
the younger.''\footnote{\textbf{9:12} Genesis 25:23}

\hypertarget{explain-the-reasons-why-pablo-gives-up-his-rights}{%
\subsection{Explain the reasons why Pablo gives up his
rights}\label{explain-the-reasons-why-pablo-gives-up-his-rights}}

\bibleverse{13} Even as it is written, ``Jacob I loved, but Esau I
hated.''\footnote{\textbf{9:13} Malachi 1:2-3}

\hypertarget{election-to-salvation-is-a-free-work-of-gods-grace-the-denial-of-salvation-and-grace-does-not-allow-man-to-fight-with-god}{%
\subsection{Election to salvation is a free work of God's grace; the
denial of salvation and grace does not allow man to fight with
God}\label{election-to-salvation-is-a-free-work-of-gods-grace-the-denial-of-salvation-and-grace-does-not-allow-man-to-fight-with-god}}

\bibleverse{14} What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with
God? May it never be! \bibleverse{15} For he said to Moses, ``I will
have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
have compassion.''\footnote{\textbf{9:15} Exodus 33:19} \bibleverse{16}
So then it is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who
has mercy. \bibleverse{17} For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, ``For this
very purpose I caused you to be raised up, that I might show in you my
power, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the
earth.''\footnote{\textbf{9:17} Exodus 9:16} \bibleverse{18} So then, he
has mercy on whom he desires, and he hardens whom he desires.

\hypertarget{pablo-although-outwardly-completely-free-is-nonetheless-a-servant-of-all-men}{%
\subsection{Pablo, although outwardly completely free, is nonetheless a
servant of all
men}\label{pablo-although-outwardly-completely-free-is-nonetheless-a-servant-of-all-men}}

\bibleverse{19} You will say then to me, ``Why does he still find fault?
For who withstands his will?'' \bibleverse{20} But indeed, O man, who
are you to reply against God? Will the thing formed ask him who formed
it, ``Why did you make me like this?''\footnote{\textbf{9:20} Isaiah
  29:16; 45:9} \bibleverse{21} Or hasn't the potter a right over the
clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel for honor, and
another for dishonor? \bibleverse{22} What if God, willing to show his
wrath and to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of
wrath prepared for destruction, \bibleverse{23} and that he might make
known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared
beforehand for glory---

\hypertarget{the-apostle-as-a-competitor-for-the-heavenly-prize}{%
\subsection{The apostle as a competitor for the heavenly
prize}\label{the-apostle-as-a-competitor-for-the-heavenly-prize}}

\bibleverse{24} us, whom he also called, not from the Jews only, but
also from the Gentiles? \bibleverse{25} As he says also in Hosea, ``I
will call them `my people,' which were not my people; and her `beloved,'
who was not beloved.''\footnote{\textbf{9:25} Hosea 2:23}
\bibleverse{26} ``It will be that in the place where it was said to
them, `You are not my people,' there they will be called `children of
the living God.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{9:26} Hosea 1:10} \bibleverse{27}
Isaiah cries concerning Israel, ``If the number of the children of
Israel are as the sand of the sea, it is the remnant who will be saved;
\bibleverse{28} for he will finish the work and cut it short in
righteousness, because the Lord will make a short work upon the
earth.''\footnote{\textbf{9:28} Isaiah 10:22-23} \bibleverse{29} As
Isaiah has said before, ``Unless the Lord of Armies\footnote{\textbf{9:29}
  Greek: Sabaoth (for Hebrew: Tze'va'ot)} had left us a seed, we would
have become like Sodom, and would have been made like
Gomorrah.''\footnote{\textbf{9:29} Isaiah 1:9}

\hypertarget{the-guilt-of-the-jews-consisted-in-the-rejection-of-the-righteousness-of-faith-and-excessive-persecution-of-the-righteousness-of-works}{%
\subsection{The guilt of the Jews consisted in the rejection of the
righteousness of faith and excessive persecution of the righteousness of
works}\label{the-guilt-of-the-jews-consisted-in-the-rejection-of-the-righteousness-of-faith-and-excessive-persecution-of-the-righteousness-of-works}}

\bibleverse{30} What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, who didn't
follow after righteousness, attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of faith; \bibleverse{31} but Israel, following
after a law of righteousness, didn't arrive at the law of righteousness.
\bibleverse{32} Why? Because they didn't seek it by faith, but as it
were by works of the law. They stumbled over the stumbling stone,
\bibleverse{33} even as it is written, ``Behold,\footnote{\textbf{9:33}
  ``Behold'', from ``\greek{ἰδοὺ}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} I lay
in Zion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense; and no one who believes
in him will be disappointed.''\footnote{\textbf{9:33} Isaiah 8:14; 28:16}

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Hermanos, el deseo de mi corazón y mi oración a Dios es
por Israel, para que se salve. \bibleverse{2} Porque doy testimonio de
ellos de que tienen celo por Dios, pero no según el conocimiento.
\bibleverse{3} Porque ignorando la justicia de Dios, y tratando de
establecer su propia justicia, no se sometieron a la justicia de Dios.

\hypertarget{la-falta-de-israel-es-auxfan-muxe1s-grave-ya-que-dios-no-ha-descuidado-nada-para-llevar-a-israel-a-la-justicia-de-la-fe-desde-la-uxe9poca-de-moisuxe9s}{%
\subsection{La falta de Israel es aún más grave ya que Dios no ha
descuidado nada para llevar a Israel a la justicia de la fe desde la
época de
Moisés}\label{la-falta-de-israel-es-auxfan-muxe1s-grave-ya-que-dios-no-ha-descuidado-nada-para-llevar-a-israel-a-la-justicia-de-la-fe-desde-la-uxe9poca-de-moisuxe9s}}

\bibleverse{4} Porque Cristo es el cumplimiento de la ley para la
justicia de todo el que cree. \footnote{\textbf{10:4} Mat 5,17; Heb
  8,13; Juan 3,18; Gal 3,24-25}

\bibleverse{5} Porque Moisés escribe sobre la justicia de la ley: ``El
que las cumpla vivirá por ellas''. \footnote{\textbf{10:5} Levítico 18:5}
\bibleverse{6} Pero la justicia que es de la fe dice esto: ``No digas en
tu corazón: ``¿Quién subirá al cielo?\footnote{\textbf{10:6}
  Deuteronomio 30:12} (es decir, hacer bajar a Cristo); \bibleverse{7}
o, `¿Quién bajará al abismo?\footnote{\textbf{10:7} Deuteronomio 30:13}
(es decir, hacer subir a Cristo de entre los muertos)''. \bibleverse{8}
Pero, ¿qué dice? ``La palabra está cerca de ti, en tu boca y en tu
corazón''\footnote{\textbf{10:8} Deuteronomio 30:14} , es decir, la
palabra de fe que predicamos: \bibleverse{9} que si confiesas con tu
boca que Jesús es el Señor y crees en tu corazón que Dios lo resucitó de
entre los muertos, te salvarás. \footnote{\textbf{10:9} Mat 10,32; 2Cor
  4,5} \bibleverse{10} Porque con el corazón se cree para obtener la
justicia, y con la boca se confiesa para obtener la salvación.
\bibleverse{11} Porque la Escritura dice: ``El que cree en él no quedará
defraudado''. \footnote{\textbf{10:11} Isaías 28:16}

\bibleverse{12} Porque no hay distinción entre judío y griego, pues el
mismo Señor es Señor de todos, y es rico para todos los que le invocan.
\footnote{\textbf{10:12} Hech 10,34-35; Hech 15,9} \bibleverse{13}
Porque ``Todo el que invoque el nombre del Señor se salvará''.
\footnote{\textbf{10:13} Joel 2:32} \bibleverse{14} ¿Cómo, pues,
invocarán a aquel en quien no han creído? ¿Cómo creerán en él si no han
oído? ¿Cómo oirán sin un predicador? \bibleverse{15} ¿Y cómo van a
predicar si no son enviados? Como está escrito: ``Qué hermosos son los
pies de los que anuncian la Buena Nueva de la paz, que traen buenas
noticias''. \footnote{\textbf{10:15} Isaías 52:7}

\hypertarget{la-inexcusabilidad-de-la-parte-incruxe9dula-de-israel-que-ha-rechazado-la-salvaciuxf3n-que-tambiuxe9n-le-fue-ofrecida}{%
\subsection{La inexcusabilidad de la parte incrédula de Israel, que ha
rechazado la salvación que también le fue
ofrecida}\label{la-inexcusabilidad-de-la-parte-incruxe9dula-de-israel-que-ha-rechazado-la-salvaciuxf3n-que-tambiuxe9n-le-fue-ofrecida}}

\bibleverse{16} Pero no todos escucharon las buenas noticias. Porque
Isaías dice: ``Señor, ¿quién ha creído en nuestro informe?'' \footnote{\textbf{10:16}
  Isaías 53:1} \bibleverse{17} Así que la fe viene por el oír, y el oír
por la palabra de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{10:17} Juan 17,20}
\bibleverse{18} Pero yo digo, ¿no escucharon? Sí, ciertamente, ``Su
sonido se extendió por toda la tierra, sus palabras hasta los confines
del mundo\footnote{\textbf{10:18} Salmo 19:4} ''. \footnote{\textbf{10:18}
  Rom 15,19}

\bibleverse{19} Pero yo pregunto, ¿no lo sabía Israel? Primero dice
Moisés, ``Te provocaré a los celos con lo que no es una nación. Te haré
enfadar con una nación vacía de entendimiento\footnote{\textbf{10:19}
  Deuteronomio 32:21} ''.

\bibleverse{20} Isaías es muy audaz y dice, ``Me encontraron los que no
me buscaron. Me revelé a los que no preguntaron por mí\footnote{\textbf{10:20}
  Isaías 65:1} ''. \footnote{\textbf{10:20} Rom 9,30}

\bibleverse{21} Pero sobre Israel dice: ``Todo el día extendí mis manos
a un pueblo desobediente y contrario''. \footnote{\textbf{10:21} Isaías
  65:2}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{in-contrast-to-the-accusation-of-weakness-of-character-and-carnal-change-paul-points-out-the-tried-and-tested-power-of-his-work-to-his-opponents}{%
\subsection{In contrast to the accusation of weakness of character and
carnal change, Paul points out the tried and tested power of his work to
his
opponents}\label{in-contrast-to-the-accusation-of-weakness-of-character-and-carnal-change-paul-points-out-the-tried-and-tested-power-of-his-work-to-his-opponents}}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\hypertarget{das-durch-guxf6ttliche-gnadenerweise-in-der-wuxfcste-gesegnete-und-zur-rettung-ins-heilige-land-berufene-israel}{%
\subsection{Das durch göttliche Gnadenerweise in der Wüste gesegnete und
zur Rettung ins heilige Land berufene
Israel}\label{das-durch-guxf6ttliche-gnadenerweise-in-der-wuxfcste-gesegnete-und-zur-rettung-ins-heilige-land-berufene-israel}}

\bibleverse{1} Brothers, my heart's desire and my prayer to God is for
Israel, that they may be saved. \bibleverse{2} For I testify about them
that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
\bibleverse{3} For being ignorant of God's righteousness, and seeking to
establish their own righteousness, they didn't subject themselves to the
righteousness of God.

\hypertarget{israels-fault-is-even-more-serious-since-god-has-neglected-nothing-to-bring-israel-to-the-righteousness-of-faith-since-the-time-of-moses}{%
\subsection{Israel's fault is even more serious since God has neglected
nothing to bring Israel to the righteousness of faith since the time of
Moses}\label{israels-fault-is-even-more-serious-since-god-has-neglected-nothing-to-bring-israel-to-the-righteousness-of-faith-since-the-time-of-moses}}

\bibleverse{4} For Christ is the fulfillment\footnote{\textbf{10:4} or,
  completion, or end} of the law for righteousness to everyone who
believes.

\hypertarget{despite-this-because-they-willingly-served-their-lust-for-meat-they-were-rejected-as-a-warning-example-to-us}{%
\subsection{Despite this, because they willingly served their lust for
meat, they were rejected as a warning example to
us}\label{despite-this-because-they-willingly-served-their-lust-for-meat-they-were-rejected-as-a-warning-example-to-us}}

\bibleverse{5} For Moses writes about the righteousness of the law,
``The one who does them will live by them.''\footnote{\textbf{10:5}
  Leviticus 18:5} \bibleverse{6} But the righteousness which is of faith
says this, ``Don't say in your heart, `Who will ascend into
heaven?'\footnote{\textbf{10:6} Deuteronomy 30:12} (that is, to bring
Christ down);

\hypertarget{the-apostles-right-to-boast-in-his-office-and-defend-himself-against-charges-of-personal-worthlessness}{%
\subsection{The apostle's right to boast in his office and defend
himself against charges of personal
worthlessness}\label{the-apostles-right-to-boast-in-his-office-and-defend-himself-against-charges-of-personal-worthlessness}}

\bibleverse{7} or, `Who will descend into the abyss?'\footnote{\textbf{10:7}
  Deuteronomy 30:13} (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.)''
\bibleverse{8} But what does it say? ``The word is near you, in your
mouth and in your heart;''\footnote{\textbf{10:8} Deuteronomy 30:14}
that is, the word of faith which we preach: \bibleverse{9} that if you
will confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your
heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
\bibleverse{10} For with the heart one believes resulting in
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made resulting in
salvation. \bibleverse{11} For the Scripture says, ``Whoever believes in
him will not be disappointed.''\footnote{\textbf{10:11} Isaiah 28:16}

\hypertarget{the-difference-between-the-self-fame-correctly-practiced-by-pablo-and-the-conceit-of-his-opponents}{%
\subsection{The difference between the self-fame correctly practiced by
Pablo and the conceit of his
opponents}\label{the-difference-between-the-self-fame-correctly-practiced-by-pablo-and-the-conceit-of-his-opponents}}

\bibleverse{12} For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for
the same Lord is Lord of all, and is rich to all who call on him.
\bibleverse{13} For, ``Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be
saved.''\footnote{\textbf{10:13} Joel 2:32}

\hypertarget{participation-in-idolatry-and-sacrificial-meals-is-incompatible-with-the-celebration-of-the-christian-lords-supper-and-should-therefore-be-avoided}{%
\subsection{Participation in idolatry and sacrificial meals is
incompatible with the celebration of the Christian Lord's Supper and
should therefore be
avoided}\label{participation-in-idolatry-and-sacrificial-meals-is-incompatible-with-the-celebration-of-the-christian-lords-supper-and-should-therefore-be-avoided}}

\bibleverse{14} How then will they call on him in whom they have not
believed? How will they believe in him whom they have not heard? How
will they hear without a preacher? \bibleverse{15} And how will they
preach unless they are sent? As it is written: ``How beautiful are the
feet of those who preach the Good News of peace, who bring glad tidings
of good things!''\footnote{\textbf{10:15} Isaiah 52:7}

\hypertarget{the-inexcusability-of-the-unbelieving-part-of-israel-which-has-rejected-the-salvation-that-was-also-offered}{%
\subsection{The inexcusability of the unbelieving part of Israel, which
has rejected the salvation that was also
offered}\label{the-inexcusability-of-the-unbelieving-part-of-israel-which-has-rejected-the-salvation-that-was-also-offered}}

\bibleverse{16} But they didn't all listen to the glad news. For Isaiah
says, ``Lord, who has believed our report?''\footnote{\textbf{10:16}
  Isaiah 53:1} \bibleverse{17} So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. \bibleverse{18} But I say, didn't they hear? Yes, most
certainly, ``Their sound went out into all the earth, their words to the
ends of the world.''\footnote{\textbf{10:18} Psalm 19:4} \bibleverse{19}
But I ask, didn't Israel know? First Moses says, ``I will provoke you to
jealousy with that which is no nation. I will make you angry with a
nation void of understanding.''\footnote{\textbf{10:19} Deuteronomy
  32:21} \bibleverse{20} Isaiah is very bold and says, ``I was found by
those who didn't seek me. I was revealed to those who didn't ask for
me.''\footnote{\textbf{10:20} Isaiah 65:1} \bibleverse{21} But about
Israel he says, ``All day long I stretched out my hands to a disobedient
and contrary people.''\footnote{\textbf{10:21} Isaiah 65:2}

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-mayor-parte-de-los-juduxedos-es-terca-y-rechazada-por-dios-pero-incluso-ahora-una-pequeuxf1a-parte-estuxe1-destinada-a-la-salvaciuxf3n-a-travuxe9s-de-la-gracia-de-dios}{%
\subsection{La mayor parte de los judíos es terca y rechazada por Dios,
pero incluso ahora una pequeña parte está destinada a la salvación a
través de la gracia de
Dios}\label{la-mayor-parte-de-los-juduxedos-es-terca-y-rechazada-por-dios-pero-incluso-ahora-una-pequeuxf1a-parte-estuxe1-destinada-a-la-salvaciuxf3n-a-travuxe9s-de-la-gracia-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Pregunto entonces, ¿rechazó Dios a su pueblo? ¡Que nunca
lo haga! Porque yo también soy israelita, descendiente de Abraham, de la
tribu de Benjamín. \footnote{\textbf{11:1} Sal 94,14; Jer 31,37; Fil 3,5}
\bibleverse{2} Dios no rechazó a su pueblo, al que conoció de antemano.
¿O no sabes lo que dice la Escritura sobre Elías? Cómo suplica a Dios
contra Israel: \bibleverse{3} ``Señor, han matado a tus profetas. Han
derribado tus altares. Me han dejado solo, y buscan mi vida''.
\footnote{\textbf{11:3} 1 Reyes 19:10,14} \bibleverse{4} ¿Pero cómo le
responde Dios? ``Me he reservado siete mil hombres que no han doblado la
rodilla ante Baal''. \footnote{\textbf{11:4} 1 Reyes 19:18}
\bibleverse{5} Así también en este tiempo hay un remanente según la
elección de la gracia. \footnote{\textbf{11:5} Rom 9,27} \bibleverse{6}
Y si es por gracia, ya no es por obras; de lo contrario, la gracia ya no
es gracia. Pero si es por obras, ya no es gracia; de lo contrario, la
obra ya no es obra.

\bibleverse{7} ¿Qué es entonces? Lo que Israel busca, eso no lo obtuvo,
pero los elegidos lo obtuvieron, y los demás se endurecieron.
\footnote{\textbf{11:7} Rom 9,31} \bibleverse{8} Como está escrito:
``Dios les dio un espíritu de estupor, ojos para no ver y oídos para no
oír, hasta el día de hoy.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:8} Deuteronomio 29:4;
  Isaías 29:10} \footnote{\textbf{11:8} Deut 29,4}

\bibleverse{9} David dice, ``Que su mesa se convierta en un lazo, en una
trampa, un tropiezo, y una retribución para ellos. \bibleverse{10} Que
se les oscurezcan los ojos para que no vean. Mantengan siempre la
espalda doblada''.\footnote{\textbf{11:10} Salmo 69:22,23}

\hypertarget{el-propuxf3sito-divino-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-en-el-llamado-de-los-gentiles-era-vencer-la-incredulidad-de-los-juduxedos-estimuluxe1ndolos-a-emularlos-su-rechazo-no-es-definitivo}{%
\subsection{El propósito divino de la salvación en el llamado de los
gentiles era vencer la incredulidad de los judíos estimulándolos a
emularlos; su rechazo no es
definitivo}\label{el-propuxf3sito-divino-de-la-salvaciuxf3n-en-el-llamado-de-los-gentiles-era-vencer-la-incredulidad-de-los-juduxedos-estimuluxe1ndolos-a-emularlos-su-rechazo-no-es-definitivo}}

\bibleverse{11} Pregunto entonces, ¿acaso tropezaron para caer? ¡Que
nunca sea así! Pero por su caída ha llegado la salvación a los gentiles,
para provocarles celos. \footnote{\textbf{11:11} Hech 13,46; Rom 10,19;
  Deut 32,21} \bibleverse{12} Ahora bien, si su caída es la riqueza del
mundo, y su pérdida la riqueza de los gentiles, ¡cuánto más su plenitud!

\bibleverse{13} Porque a vosotros, que sois gentiles, os hablo. Pues
como soy apóstol de los gentiles, glorifico mi ministerio,
\bibleverse{14} por si de algún modo provoco celos a los que son de mi
carne, y puedo salvar a algunos de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{11:14} 1Tim
  4,16; 1Cor 9,20-22} \bibleverse{15} Porque si el rechazo de ellos es
la reconciliación del mundo, ¿qué sería su aceptación, sino la vida de
entre los muertos?

\bibleverse{16} Si las primicias son santas, también lo es la masa. Si
la raíz es santa, también lo son las ramas. \bibleverse{17} Pero si
algunas de las ramas fueron desgajadas, y tú, siendo un olivo silvestre,
fuiste injertado entre ellas y te hiciste partícipe con ellas de la raíz
y de la riqueza del olivo, \footnote{\textbf{11:17} Efes 2,11-14}
\bibleverse{18} no te jactes de las ramas. Pero si te jactas, recuerda
que no eres tú quien sostiene la raíz, sino que la raíz te sostiene a
ti. \footnote{\textbf{11:18} Juan 4,22} \bibleverse{19} Entonces dirás:
``Las ramas fueron cortadas para que yo fuera injertado''.
\bibleverse{20} Es cierto; por su incredulidad fueron desgajados, y tú
te mantienes por tu fe. No te envanezcas, sino teme; \footnote{\textbf{11:20}
  1Cor 10,12} \bibleverse{21} porque si Dios no perdonó a las ramas
naturales, tampoco te perdonará a ti. \bibleverse{22} Ved, pues, la
bondad y la severidad de Dios. Con los que cayeron, la severidad; pero
con ustedes, la bondad, si continúan en su bondad; de lo contrario,
también ustedes serán cortados. \footnote{\textbf{11:22} Juan 15,2; Juan
  15,4; Heb 3,14} \bibleverse{23} También ellos, si no continúan en su
incredulidad, serán injertados, pues Dios puede volver a injertarlos.
\bibleverse{24} Porque si vosotros fuisteis cortados de lo que es por
naturaleza un olivo silvestre, y fuisteis injertados contra natura en un
buen olivo, ¿cuánto más éstos, que son las ramas naturales, serán
injertados en su propio olivo?

\hypertarget{todo-el-resto-del-pueblo-de-israel-eventualmente-llegaruxe1-a-la-fe-despuuxe9s-de-que-las-elecciones-gentiles-se-conviertan-y-todo-seruxe1-usado-para-la-justificaciuxf3n-y-glorificaciuxf3n-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Todo el resto del pueblo de Israel eventualmente llegará a
la fe después de que las elecciones gentiles se conviertan, y todo será
usado para la justificación y glorificación de
Dios}\label{todo-el-resto-del-pueblo-de-israel-eventualmente-llegaruxe1-a-la-fe-despuuxe9s-de-que-las-elecciones-gentiles-se-conviertan-y-todo-seruxe1-usado-para-la-justificaciuxf3n-y-glorificaciuxf3n-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{25} Porque no quiero que ignoréis, hermanos, este misterio,
para que no seáis sabios en vuestra propia opinión, de que a Israel le
ha sucedido un endurecimiento parcial, hasta que haya entrado la
plenitud de los gentiles, \footnote{\textbf{11:25} Juan 10,16}
\bibleverse{26} y así se salve todo Israel. Como está escrito, ``Saldrá
de Sión el Libertador, y apartará la impiedad de Jacob. \footnote{\textbf{11:26}
  Mat 23,39; Sal 14,7} \bibleverse{27} Este es mi pacto con ellos,
cuando les quite sus pecados\footnote{\textbf{11:27} Isaías 59:20-21;
  27:9; Jeremías 31:33-34} ''.

\bibleverse{28} En cuanto a la Buena Nueva, son enemigos por causa de
ustedes. Pero en cuanto a la elección, son amados por causa de los
padres. \bibleverse{29} Porque los dones y la llamada de Dios son
irrevocables. \footnote{\textbf{11:29} Núm 23,19} \bibleverse{30} Porque
así como vosotros en el pasado fuisteis desobedientes a Dios, pero ahora
habéis obtenido misericordia por su desobediencia, \bibleverse{31} así
también éstos han sido ahora desobedientes, para que por la misericordia
que se os ha mostrado, obtengan también misericordia. \bibleverse{32}
Porque Dios ha obligado a todos a la desobediencia, para tener
misericordia de todos. \footnote{\textbf{11:32} Gal 3,22; 1Tim 2,4}

\bibleverse{33} ¡Oh, la profundidad de las riquezas de la sabiduría y
del conocimiento de Dios! ¡Cuán inescrutable son sus juicios, y sus
caminos que no pueden ser trazados! \footnote{\textbf{11:33} Is 45,15;
  Is 55,8-9} \bibleverse{34} ``Porque ¿quién ha conocido la mente del
Señor? ¿O quién ha sido su consejero?'' \footnote{\textbf{11:34} Isaías
  40:13} \footnote{\textbf{11:34} Jer 23,18; 1Cor 2,16} \bibleverse{35}
``O quien le ha dado primero, y le será devuelto de nuevo?'' \footnote{\textbf{11:35}
  Job 41:11}

\bibleverse{36} Porque de él, por él y para él son todas las cosas. A él
sea la gloria por los siglos de los siglos. Amén.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} I ask then, did God reject his people? May it never be!
For I also am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of
Benjamin. \bibleverse{2} God didn't reject his people, whom he foreknew.
Or don't you know what the Scripture says about Elijah? How he pleads
with God against Israel: \bibleverse{3} ``Lord, they have killed your
prophets. They have broken down your altars. I am left alone, and they
seek my life.''\footnote{\textbf{11:3} 1 Kings 19:10,14} \bibleverse{4}
But how does God answer him? ``I have reserved for myself seven thousand
men who have not bowed the knee to Baal.''\footnote{\textbf{11:4} 1
  Kings 19:18} \bibleverse{5} Even so too at this present time also
there is a remnant according to the election of grace. \bibleverse{6}
And if by grace, then it is no longer of works; otherwise grace is no
longer grace. But if it is of works, it is no longer grace; otherwise
work is no longer work. \bibleverse{7} What then? That which Israel
seeks for, that he didn't obtain, but the chosen ones obtained it, and
the rest were hardened. \bibleverse{8} According as it is written, ``God
gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that they should not see, and ears
that they should not hear, to this very day.'' \footnote{\textbf{11:8}
  Deuteronomy 29:4; Isaiah 29:10} \bibleverse{9} David says, ``Let their
table be made a snare, a trap, a stumbling block, and a retribution to
them. \bibleverse{10} Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see.
Always keep their backs bent.''\footnote{\textbf{11:10} Psalm 69:22,23}
\bibleverse{11} I ask then, did they stumble that they might fall? May
it never be! But by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles, to
provoke them to jealousy. \bibleverse{12} Now if their fall is the
riches of the world, and their loss the riches of the Gentiles, how much
more their fullness! \bibleverse{13} For I speak to you who are
Gentiles. Since then as I am an apostle to Gentiles, I glorify my
ministry, \bibleverse{14} if by any means I may provoke to jealousy
those who are my flesh, and may save some of them. \bibleverse{15} For
if the rejection of them is the reconciling of the world, what would
their acceptance be, but life from the dead? \bibleverse{16} If the
first fruit is holy, so is the lump. If the root is holy, so are the
branches. \bibleverse{17} But if some of the branches were broken off,
and you, being a wild olive, were grafted in among them and became
partaker with them of the root and of the richness of the olive tree,
\bibleverse{18} don't boast over the branches. But if you boast,
remember that it is not you who support the root, but the root supports
you. \bibleverse{19} You will say then, ``Branches were broken off, that
I might be grafted in.'' \bibleverse{20} True; by their unbelief they
were broken off, and you stand by your faith. Don't be conceited, but
fear; \bibleverse{21} for if God didn't spare the natural branches,
neither will he spare you. \bibleverse{22} See then the goodness and
severity of God. Toward those who fell, severity; but toward you,
goodness, if you continue in his goodness; otherwise you also will be
cut off.

\hypertarget{when-is-it-safe-to-eat-meat-sacrificed-to-idols-restriction-of-christian-liberty-out-of-consideration-for-brotherly-love}{%
\subsection{When is it safe to eat meat sacrificed to idols? Restriction
of Christian liberty out of consideration for brotherly
love}\label{when-is-it-safe-to-eat-meat-sacrificed-to-idols-restriction-of-christian-liberty-out-of-consideration-for-brotherly-love}}

\bibleverse{23} They also, if they don't continue in their unbelief,
will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
\bibleverse{24} For if you were cut out of that which is by nature a
wild olive tree, and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive
tree, how much more will these, which are the natural branches, be
grafted into their own olive tree? \bibleverse{25} For I don't desire
you to be ignorant, brothers,\footnote{\textbf{11:25} The word for
  ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be correctly
  translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} of this mystery,
so that you won't be wise in your own conceits, that a partial hardening
has happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in,
\bibleverse{26} and so all Israel will be saved. Even as it is written,
``There will come out of Zion the Deliverer, and he will turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. \bibleverse{27} This is my covenant with them,
when I will take away their sins.''\footnote{\textbf{11:27} Isaiah
  59:20-21; 27:9; Jeremiah 31:33-34} \bibleverse{28} Concerning the Good
News, they are enemies for your sake. But concerning the election, they
are beloved for the fathers' sake. \bibleverse{29} For the gifts and the
calling of God are irrevocable. \bibleverse{30} For as you in time past
were disobedient to God, but now have obtained mercy by their
disobedience,

\hypertarget{final-admonition-for-the-correct-christian-walk-at-all-times}{%
\subsection{Final admonition for the correct Christian walk at all
times}\label{final-admonition-for-the-correct-christian-walk-at-all-times}}

\hypertarget{why-and-with-what-right-does-the-apostle-praise-himself}{%
\subsection{Why and with what right does the apostle praise
himself}\label{why-and-with-what-right-does-the-apostle-praise-himself}}

\hypertarget{most-of-the-jews-are-stubborn-and-rejected-by-god-but-even-now-a-small-part-is-destined-for-salvation-through-gods-grace}{%
\subsection{Most of the Jews are stubborn and rejected by God, but even
now a small part is destined for salvation through God's
grace}\label{most-of-the-jews-are-stubborn-and-rejected-by-god-but-even-now-a-small-part-is-destined-for-salvation-through-gods-grace}}

\hypertarget{on-the-decent-behavior-of-men-and-the-veil-of-women-during-prayer-and-worship}{%
\subsection{On the decent behavior of men and the veil of women during
prayer and
worship}\label{on-the-decent-behavior-of-men-and-the-veil-of-women-during-prayer-and-worship}}

\hypertarget{the-glory-of-their-selfless-gratuitous-efficacy-in-contrast-to-the-opponents-who-work-in-the-service-of-satan}{%
\subsection{The glory of their selfless (gratuitous) efficacy in
contrast to the opponents who work in the service of
Satan}\label{the-glory-of-their-selfless-gratuitous-efficacy-in-contrast-to-the-opponents-who-work-in-the-service-of-satan}}

\hypertarget{rejection-of-disdain-for-women-and-all-discussions-on-the-subject}{%
\subsection{Rejection of disdain for women and all discussions on the
subject}\label{rejection-of-disdain-for-women-and-all-discussions-on-the-subject}}

\hypertarget{the-divine-purpose-of-salvation-in-the-calling-of-the-gentiles-was-to-overcome-the-unbelief-of-the-jews-by-encouraging-them-to-emulate-them-your-rejection-is-not-final}{%
\subsection{The divine purpose of salvation in the calling of the
Gentiles was to overcome the unbelief of the Jews by encouraging them to
emulate them; your rejection is not
final}\label{the-divine-purpose-of-salvation-in-the-calling-of-the-gentiles-was-to-overcome-the-unbelief-of-the-jews-by-encouraging-them-to-emulate-them-your-rejection-is-not-final}}

\hypertarget{another-request-from-the-apostle-for-his-own-silly-fame}{%
\subsection{Another request from the apostle for his own silly
fame}\label{another-request-from-the-apostle-for-his-own-silly-fame}}

\hypertarget{serious-reprimand-for-grievances-at-common-meals-and-instructions-for-the-worthy-celebration-of-the-lords-supper}{%
\subsection{Serious reprimand for grievances at common meals and
instructions for the worthy celebration of the Lord's
Supper}\label{serious-reprimand-for-grievances-at-common-meals-and-instructions-for-the-worthy-celebration-of-the-lords-supper}}

\hypertarget{the-apostle-boasts-of-his-ancestry-of-his-office-of-the-fullness-of-his-sufferings-in-apostolic-service}{%
\subsection{The apostle boasts of his ancestry, of his office, of the
fullness of his sufferings in apostolic
service}\label{the-apostle-boasts-of-his-ancestry-of-his-office-of-the-fullness-of-his-sufferings-in-apostolic-service}}

\hypertarget{the-correct-celebration-of-the-lords-supper-and-the-bad-consequences-of-unworthy-enjoyment-final-reminder}{%
\subsection{The correct celebration of the Lord's Supper and the bad
consequences of unworthy enjoyment; final
reminder}\label{the-correct-celebration-of-the-lords-supper-and-the-bad-consequences-of-unworthy-enjoyment-final-reminder}}

\hypertarget{all-the-rest-of-the-people-of-israel-will-eventually-come-to-faith-after-the-gentile-choices-are-converted-and-all-will-be-used-for-the-justification-and-glorification-of-god}{%
\subsection{All the rest of the people of Israel will eventually come to
faith after the Gentile choices are converted, and all will be used for
the justification and glorification of
God}\label{all-the-rest-of-the-people-of-israel-will-eventually-come-to-faith-after-the-gentile-choices-are-converted-and-all-will-be-used-for-the-justification-and-glorification-of-god}}

\bibleverse{31} even so these also have now been disobedient, that by
the mercy shown to you they may also obtain mercy. \bibleverse{32} For
God has bound all to disobedience, that he might have mercy on all.
\bibleverse{33} Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
tracing out! \bibleverse{34} ``For who has known the mind of the Lord?
Or who has been his counselor?''\footnote{\textbf{11:34} Isaiah 40:13}
\bibleverse{35} ``Or who has first given to him, and it will be repaid
to him again?''\footnote{\textbf{11:35} Job 41:11} \bibleverse{36} For
of him and through him and to him are all things. To him be the glory
for ever! Amen.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{advertencia-general-como-entrada-santificaciuxf3n-de-la-vida-personal-a-travuxe9s-de-la-entrega-completa-a-dios}{%
\subsection{Advertencia general como entrada: santificación de la vida
personal a través de la entrega completa a
Dios}\label{advertencia-general-como-entrada-santificaciuxf3n-de-la-vida-personal-a-travuxe9s-de-la-entrega-completa-a-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Por lo tanto, os exhorto, hermanos, por la misericordia
de Dios, a que presentéis vuestros cuerpos en sacrificio vivo, santo,
agradable a Dios, que es vuestro servicio espiritual. \footnote{\textbf{12:1}
  Rom 6,13} \bibleverse{2} No os conforméis a este mundo, sino
transformaos mediante la renovación de vuestra mente, para que podáis
comprobar cuál es la buena, agradable y perfecta voluntad de Dios.
\footnote{\textbf{12:2} Efes 4,23; Efes 5,10; Efes 5,17}

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-a-la-humildad-del-individuo-y-al-uso-fiel-de-los-dones-recibidos-al-servicio-de-la-comunidad}{%
\subsection{Exhortación a la humildad del individuo y al uso fiel de los
dones recibidos al servicio de la
comunidad}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-a-la-humildad-del-individuo-y-al-uso-fiel-de-los-dones-recibidos-al-servicio-de-la-comunidad}}

\bibleverse{3} Pues digo, por la gracia que me ha sido dada, a todos los
que están entre vosotros, que no tengan más alto concepto de sí mismos
que el que deben tener, sino que piensen razonablemente, según la medida
de fe que Dios ha repartido a cada uno. \footnote{\textbf{12:3} 1Cor
  4,6; 1Cor 12,11; Efes 4,7; Mat 20,26} \bibleverse{4} Porque así como
tenemos muchos miembros en un solo cuerpo, y no todos los miembros
tienen la misma función, \footnote{\textbf{12:4} 1Cor 12,12}
\bibleverse{5} así nosotros, que somos muchos, somos un solo cuerpo en
Cristo, y cada uno es miembro del otro, \footnote{\textbf{12:5} 1Cor
  12,27; Efes 4,4; Efes 4,25} \bibleverse{6} teniendo dones diferentes
según la gracia que nos fue dada: si de profecía, profeticemos según la
proporción de nuestra fe; \footnote{\textbf{12:6} 1Cor 4,7; 1Cor 12,4}
\bibleverse{7} o de servicio, entreguémonos al servicio; o el que
enseña, a su enseñanza; \footnote{\textbf{12:7} 1Pe 4,10-11}
\bibleverse{8} o el que exhorta, a su exhortación; el que da, que lo
haga con generosidad; el que gobierna, con diligencia; el que hace
misericordia, con alegría. \footnote{\textbf{12:8} Mat 6,3; 2Cor 8,2;
  2Cor 9,7}

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-a-amar-fraternalmente-y-a-ejercitar-sentimientos-cristianos-contra-amigos-y-enemigos}{%
\subsection{Exhortación a amar fraternalmente y a ejercitar sentimientos
cristianos contra amigos y
enemigos}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-a-amar-fraternalmente-y-a-ejercitar-sentimientos-cristianos-contra-amigos-y-enemigos}}

\bibleverse{9} Que el amor sea sin hipocresía. Aborrece lo que es malo.
Aferraos a lo que es bueno. \footnote{\textbf{12:9} 1Tim 1,5; Am 5,15}
\bibleverse{10} En el amor a los hermanos, sed tiernos los unos con los
otros; en la honra, preferíos los unos a los otros, \footnote{\textbf{12:10}
  Juan 13,4-15; Fil 2,3} \bibleverse{11} no dejéis de ser diligentes,
fervientes en el espíritu, sirviendo al Señor, \footnote{\textbf{12:11}
  Apoc 3,15; Hech 18,25; Col 3,23} \bibleverse{12} alegrándoos en la
esperanza, soportando en las tribulaciones, perseverando en la oración,
\footnote{\textbf{12:12} 1Tes 5,17; Luc 18,1-8; Col 4,2} \bibleverse{13}
contribuyendo a las necesidades de los santos, y dados a la
hospitalidad. \footnote{\textbf{12:13} Heb 13,2; 3Jn 1,5-8}

\bibleverse{14} Bendice a los que te persiguen; bendice y no maldigas.
\footnote{\textbf{12:14} Mat 5,44; 1Cor 4,12; Hech 7,59} \bibleverse{15}
Alegraos con los que se alegran. Llorad con los que lloran. \footnote{\textbf{12:15}
  Sal 35,13-14; 2Cor 11,29} \bibleverse{16} Tened los mismos
sentimientos los unos hacia los otros. No sean altivos en su pensar,
sino asociaros con los humildes. No seáis sabios en vuestras propias
ideas. \footnote{\textbf{12:16} Rom 15,5; Fil 2,2} \bibleverse{17} No
paguéis a nadie mal por mal. Respetad lo que es honorable a los ojos de
todos los hombres. \footnote{\textbf{12:17} Is 5,21; 1Tes 5,15; Prov
  20,22; 2Cor 8,21} \bibleverse{18} Si es posible, en la medida en que
dependa de vosotros, estad en paz con todos los hombres. \footnote{\textbf{12:18}
  Mar 9,50; Heb 12,14} \bibleverse{19} No busquéis la venganza vosotros
mismos, amados, sino dad lugar a la ira de Dios. Porque está escrito:
``La venganza me pertenece; yo pagaré, dice el Señor''. \footnote{\textbf{12:19}
  Deuteronomio 32:35} \footnote{\textbf{12:19} Lev 19,18; Mat 5,38-44}
\bibleverse{20} Por eso``Si tu enemigo tiene hambre, aliméntalo. Si
tiene sed, dale de beber; porque al hacerlo, amontonarás carbones de
fuego sobre su cabeza''. \footnote{\textbf{12:20} Proverbios 25:21-22}
\footnote{\textbf{12:20} 2Re 6,22}

\bibleverse{21} No te dejes vencer por el mal, sino vence el mal con el
bien.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-mark-of-divinely-wrought-spiritual-gifts}{%
\subsection{The mark of divinely wrought spiritual
gifts}\label{the-mark-of-divinely-wrought-spiritual-gifts}}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\hypertarget{the-apostle-boasts-of-the-highest-graces-through-heavenly-revelations-and-the-deepest-humiliation-through-physical-suffering}{%
\subsection{The apostle boasts of the highest graces (through heavenly
revelations) and the deepest humiliation (through physical
suffering)}\label{the-apostle-boasts-of-the-highest-graces-through-heavenly-revelations-and-the-deepest-humiliation-through-physical-suffering}}

\hypertarget{general-warning-as-entry-sanctification-of-personal-life-through-complete-surrender-to-god}{%
\subsection{General warning as entry: sanctification of personal life
through complete surrender to
God}\label{general-warning-as-entry-sanctification-of-personal-life-through-complete-surrender-to-god}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore I urge you, brothers, by the mercies of God, to
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which
is your spiritual service. \bibleverse{2} Don't be conformed to this
world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may
prove what is the good, well-pleasing, and perfect will of God.

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-the-humility-of-the-individual-and-the-faithful-use-of-the-gifts-received-in-the-service-of-the-community}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to the humility of the individual and the
faithful use of the gifts received in the service of the
community}\label{exhortation-to-the-humility-of-the-individual-and-the-faithful-use-of-the-gifts-received-in-the-service-of-the-community}}

\bibleverse{3} For I say through the grace that was given me, to
everyone who is among you, not to think of yourself more highly than you
ought to think; but to think reasonably, as God has apportioned to each
person a measure of faith.

\hypertarget{diversity-of-spiritual-gifts-but-only-an-active-spirit-and-purpose}{%
\subsection{Diversity of spiritual gifts, but only an active spirit and
purpose}\label{diversity-of-spiritual-gifts-but-only-an-active-spirit-and-purpose}}

\bibleverse{4} For even as we have many members in one body, and all the
members don't have the same function, \bibleverse{5} so we, who are
many, are one body in Christ, and individually members of one another,
\bibleverse{6} having gifts differing according to the grace that was
given to us: if prophecy, let's prophesy according to the proportion of
our faith; \bibleverse{7} or service, let's give ourselves to service;
or he who teaches, to his teaching; \bibleverse{8} or he who exhorts, to
his exhorting; he who gives, let him do it with generosity; he who
rules, with diligence; he who shows mercy, with cheerfulness.

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-love-brotherly-and-to-exercise-christian-sentiments-against-friends-and-enemies}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to love brotherly and to exercise Christian
sentiments against friends and
enemies}\label{exhortation-to-love-brotherly-and-to-exercise-christian-sentiments-against-friends-and-enemies}}

\bibleverse{9} Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that which is evil.
Cling to that which is good. \bibleverse{10} In love of the brothers be
tenderly affectionate to one another; in honor prefer one another,

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-injustice-of-the-corinthians}{%
\subsection{Reference to the injustice of the
Corinthians}\label{reference-to-the-injustice-of-the-corinthians}}

\bibleverse{11} not lagging in diligence, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord,

\hypertarget{illustrated-by-the-parable-of-the-human-body-and-its-many-members}{%
\subsection{Illustrated by the parable of the human body and its many
members}\label{illustrated-by-the-parable-of-the-human-body-and-its-many-members}}

\bibleverse{12} rejoicing in hope, enduring in troubles, continuing
steadfastly in prayer, \bibleverse{13} contributing to the needs of the
saints, and given to hospitality.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-imminent-arrival-of-the-apostle-rejection-of-a-libel}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the imminent arrival of the apostle;
rejection of a
libel}\label{announcement-of-the-imminent-arrival-of-the-apostle-rejection-of-a-libel}}

\bibleverse{14} Bless those who persecute you; bless, and don't curse.
\bibleverse{15} Rejoice with those who rejoice. Weep with those who
weep. \bibleverse{16} Be of the same mind one toward another. Don't set
your mind on high things, but associate with the humble. Don't be wise
in your own conceits. \bibleverse{17} Repay no one evil for evil.
Respect what is honorable in the sight of all men. \bibleverse{18} If it
is possible, as much as it is up to you, be at peace with all men.

\hypertarget{rectification-of-an-opinion-of-the-corinthians-apostles-fear-for-the-moral-status-of-the-community}{%
\subsection{Rectification of an opinion of the Corinthians; Apostle's
fear for the moral status of the
community}\label{rectification-of-an-opinion-of-the-corinthians-apostles-fear-for-the-moral-status-of-the-community}}

\bibleverse{19} Don't seek revenge yourselves, beloved, but give place
to God's wrath. For it is written, ``Vengeance belongs to me; I will
repay, says the Lord.'' \footnote{\textbf{12:19} Deuteronomy 32:35}
\bibleverse{20} Therefore ``If your enemy is hungry, feed him. If he is
thirsty, give him a drink; for in doing so, you will heap coals of fire
on his head.''\footnote{\textbf{12:20} Proverbs 25:21-22}
\bibleverse{21} Don't be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-a-obedecer-a-las-autoridades-designadas-por-dios}{%
\subsection{Exhortación a obedecer a las autoridades designadas por
Dios}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-a-obedecer-a-las-autoridades-designadas-por-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{13}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Que toda alma se someta a las autoridades superiores,
porque no hay autoridad sino de Dios, y las que hay son ordenadas por
Dios. \footnote{\textbf{13:1} Tit 3,1; Juan 19,11; Prov 8,15}
\bibleverse{2} Por lo tanto, el que resiste a la autoridad resiste la
ordenanza de Dios; y los que resisten recibirán para sí el juicio.
\bibleverse{3} Porque los gobernantes no son un terror para la buena
obra, sino para la mala. ¿Deseas no tener miedo a la autoridad? Haced lo
que es bueno, y tendréis la alabanza de la autoridad, \footnote{\textbf{13:3}
  1Pe 2,13-14} \bibleverse{4} porque es un servidor de Dios para
vosotros para el bien. Pero si hacéis lo que es malo, temed, porque no
lleva la espada en vano, pues es un servidor de Dios, vengador para la
ira del que hace el mal. \footnote{\textbf{13:4} 2Cró 19,6-7}
\bibleverse{5} Por tanto, es necesario que estéis sometidos, no sólo por
la ira, sino también por la conciencia. \bibleverse{6} Por eso también
pagas los impuestos, pues son servidores del servicio de Dios, haciendo
continuamente esto mismo.

\hypertarget{exhortaciones-al-cumplimiento-integral-de-los-deberes-especialmente-a-la-caridad-como-cumplimiento-de-la-ley}{%
\subsection{Exhortaciones al cumplimiento integral de los deberes,
especialmente a la caridad como cumplimiento de la
ley}\label{exhortaciones-al-cumplimiento-integral-de-los-deberes-especialmente-a-la-caridad-como-cumplimiento-de-la-ley}}

\bibleverse{7} Por tanto, dad a cada uno lo que debéis: si debéis
impuestos, pagad impuestos; si tributo, tributo; si respeto, respeto; si
honor, honor. \footnote{\textbf{13:7} Mat 22,21}

\bibleverse{8} No debáis a nadie nada, sino amaros unos a otros; porque
el que ama a su prójimo ha cumplido la ley. \footnote{\textbf{13:8} Gal
  5,14; 1Tim 1,5} \bibleverse{9} Porque los mandamientos: ``No cometerás
adulterio'', ``No asesinarás'', ``No robarás\footnote{\textbf{13:9} TR
  añade ``No darás falso testimonio''.} '', ``No codiciarás''\footnote{\textbf{13:9}
  Éxodo 20:13-15,17; Deuteronomio 5:17-19,21} y cualquier otro que haya,
se resumen en esta frase: ``Amarás a tu prójimo como a ti
mismo''.\footnote{\textbf{13:9} Levítico 19:18} \bibleverse{10} El amor
no hace daño al prójimo. Por tanto, el amor es el cumplimiento de la
ley. \footnote{\textbf{13:10} 1Cor 13,4; Mat 22,40}

\hypertarget{el-fin-cercano-del-mundo-advierte-caminar-en-luz-y-santificar-la-vida-personal}{%
\subsection{El fin cercano del mundo advierte caminar en luz y
santificar la vida
personal}\label{el-fin-cercano-del-mundo-advierte-caminar-en-luz-y-santificar-la-vida-personal}}

\bibleverse{11} Haced esto, conociendo el tiempo, que ya es hora de que
os despertéis del sueño, porque la salvación está ahora más cerca de
nosotros que cuando creímos por primera vez. \footnote{\textbf{13:11}
  Efes 5,14; 1Tes 5,6-8} \bibleverse{12} La noche está lejos, y el día
está cerca. Despojémonos, pues, de las obras de las tinieblas y
pongámonos la armadura de la luz. \footnote{\textbf{13:12} 1Jn 2,8; Efes
  5,11} \bibleverse{13} Caminemos correctamente, como de día; no en
juergas y borracheras, no en promiscuidades sexuales y actos lujuriosos,
y no en contiendas y envidias. \footnote{\textbf{13:13} Luc 21,34; Efes
  5,18} \bibleverse{14} Sino revestíos del Señor Jesucristo, y no
proveáis para la carne, para sus concupiscencias. \footnote{\textbf{13:14}
  Gal 3,27; 1Cor 9,27; Col 2,23}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{13}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} Let every soul be in subjection to the higher
authorities, for there is no authority except from God, and those who
exist are ordained by God. \bibleverse{2} Therefore he who resists the
authority withstands the ordinance of God; and those who withstand will
receive to themselves judgment. \bibleverse{3} For rulers are not a
terror to the good work, but to the evil. Do you desire to have no fear
of the authority? Do that which is good, and you will have praise from
the authority, \bibleverse{4} for he is a servant of God to you for
good. But if you do that which is evil, be afraid, for he doesn't bear
the sword in vain; for he is a servant of God, an avenger for wrath to
him who does evil. \bibleverse{5} Therefore you need to be in
subjection, not only because of the wrath, but also for conscience'
sake. \bibleverse{6} For this reason you also pay taxes, for they are
servants of God's service, continually doing this very thing.
\bibleverse{7} Therefore give everyone what you owe: if you owe taxes,
pay taxes; if customs, then customs; if respect, then respect; if honor,
then honor. \bibleverse{8} Owe no one anything, except to love one
another; for he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.
\bibleverse{9} For the commandments, ``You shall not commit adultery,''
``You shall not murder,'' ``You shall not steal,''\footnote{\textbf{13:9}
  TR adds ``You shall not give false testimony,''} ``You shall not
covet,'' \footnote{\textbf{13:9} Exodus 20:13-15,17; Deuteronomy
  5:17-19,21} and whatever other commandments there are, are all summed
up in this saying, namely, ``You shall love your neighbor as
yourself.''\footnote{\textbf{13:9} Leviticus 19:18} \bibleverse{10} Love
doesn't harm a neighbor. Love therefore is the fulfillment of the law.
\bibleverse{11} Do this, knowing the time, that it is already time for
you to awaken out of sleep, for salvation is now nearer to us than when
we first believed. \bibleverse{12} The night is far gone, and the day is
near. Let's therefore throw off the deeds of darkness, and let's put on
the armor of light. \bibleverse{13} Let's walk properly, as in the day;
not in reveling and drunkenness, not in sexual promiscuity and lustful
acts, and not in strife and jealousy. \bibleverse{14} But put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, for its lusts.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{juicio-sobre-el-tema-que-conmueve-a-la-comunidad-y-advierte-contra-la-condena-sin-amor-del-modo-de-vida-externo-del-pruxf3jimo}{%
\subsection{Juicio sobre el tema que conmueve a la comunidad y advierte
contra la condena sin amor del modo de vida externo del
prójimo}\label{juicio-sobre-el-tema-que-conmueve-a-la-comunidad-y-advierte-contra-la-condena-sin-amor-del-modo-de-vida-externo-del-pruxf3jimo}}

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{14}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} Ahora bien, acepta al que es débil en la fe, pero no por
disputas de opiniones. \footnote{\textbf{14:1} Rom 15,1; 1Cor 8,9}
\bibleverse{2} Un hombre tiene fe para comer de todo, pero el que es
débil sólo come verduras. \footnote{\textbf{14:2} Gén 1,29; Gén 9,3}
\bibleverse{3} Que el que come no desprecie al que no come. Que el que
no come no juzgue al que come, porque Dios lo ha aceptado. \footnote{\textbf{14:3}
  Col 2,16} \bibleverse{4} ¿Quiénes sois vosotros para juzgar al siervo
de otro? A su propio señor le hace frente o le hace caer. Sí, se pondrá
en pie, pues Dios tiene poder para hacerlo. \footnote{\textbf{14:4} Mat
  7,1; Sant 4,11; Sant 1,4-12}

\bibleverse{5} Un hombre considera que un día es más importante. Otro
considera que todos los días son iguales. Que cada uno esté bien seguro
en su propia mente. \footnote{\textbf{14:5} Gal 4,10} \bibleverse{6} El
que observa el día, lo observa para el Señor; y el que no lo observa,
para el Señor no lo observa. El que come, come para el Señor, porque da
gracias a Dios. El que no come, para el Señor no come, y da gracias a
Dios. \bibleverse{7} Porque ninguno de nosotros vive para sí mismo, y
ninguno muere para sí mismo. \bibleverse{8} Pues si vivimos, vivimos
para el Señor. O si morimos, morimos para el Señor. Por lo tanto, si
vivimos o morimos, somos del Señor. \footnote{\textbf{14:8} Gal 2,20;
  2Cor 5,15} \bibleverse{9} Porque para ello Cristo murió, resucitó y
volvió a vivir, para ser Señor tanto de los muertos como de los vivos.

\bibleverse{10} Pero tú, ¿por qué juzgas a tu hermano? O tú, ¿por qué
desprecias a tu hermano? Porque todos compareceremos ante el tribunal de
Cristo. \footnote{\textbf{14:10} Mat 25,31-32; Hech 17,31; 2Cor 5,10}
\bibleverse{11} Porque está escrito, ``\,`Vivo yo', dice el Señor, `ante
mí se doblará toda rodilla'. Toda lengua confesará a Dios''. \footnote{\textbf{14:11}
  Isaías 45:23} \footnote{\textbf{14:11} Fil 2,10-11}

\bibleverse{12} Así pues, cada uno de nosotros dará cuenta de sí mismo a
Dios. \footnote{\textbf{14:12} Gal 6,5}

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-a-los-que-tienen-una-fe-fuerte-a-no-ofender-a-los-que-tienen-una-fe-duxe9bil-y-a-esforzarse-por-tener-una-conciencia-segura-en-todo-lo-que-hacen}{%
\subsection{Exhortación a los que tienen una fe fuerte a no ofender a
los que tienen una fe débil y a esforzarse por tener una conciencia
segura en todo lo que
hacen}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-a-los-que-tienen-una-fe-fuerte-a-no-ofender-a-los-que-tienen-una-fe-duxe9bil-y-a-esforzarse-por-tener-una-conciencia-segura-en-todo-lo-que-hacen}}

\bibleverse{13} Por lo tanto, no juzguemos más los unos a los otros,
sino juzguemos más bien esto: que ninguno ponga tropiezo a su hermano,
ni sea ocasión de caer. \footnote{\textbf{14:13} 1Cor 10,33}
\bibleverse{14} Yo sé y estoy persuadido en el Señor Jesús de que nada
es inmundo por sí mismo, sino que para el que considera que algo es
inmundo, para él es inmundo. \footnote{\textbf{14:14} Mat 15,11; Hech
  10,15; Tit 1,15} \bibleverse{15} Pero si por causa de la comida tu
hermano se entristece, ya no andas con amor. No destruyas con tu comida
a aquel por quien murió Cristo. \footnote{\textbf{14:15} 1Cor 8,11-13}
\bibleverse{16} Entonces no permitas que se calumnie tu bien,
\bibleverse{17} porque el Reino de Dios no es comer ni beber, sino
justicia, paz y alegría en el Espíritu Santo. \footnote{\textbf{14:17}
  1Cor 8,8; Heb 13,9} \bibleverse{18} Porque el que sirve a Cristo en
estas cosas es agradable a Dios y aprobado por los hombres.
\bibleverse{19} Sigamos, pues, las cosas que contribuyen a la paz y a la
edificación mutua. \footnote{\textbf{14:19} Rom 12,18; Rom 15,2}
\bibleverse{20} No echéis por tierra la obra de Dios por causa de la
comida. Todas las cosas, en efecto, son limpias; sin embargo, es malo el
hombre que crea un tropiezo al comer. \bibleverse{21} Es bueno no comer
carne, ni beber vino, ni hacer nada por lo que tu hermano tropiece, se
ofenda o se debilite.

\bibleverse{22} ¿Tienes fe? Tenla para ti mismo ante Dios. Dichoso el
que no se juzga a sí mismo en lo que aprueba. \footnote{\textbf{14:22}
  Rom 14,2; 1Cor 10,25-27} \bibleverse{23} Pero el que duda se condena
si come, porque no es de fe; y todo lo que no es de fe es pecado.

\bibleverse{24} Ahora bien, a aquel que es capaz de afianzaros según mi
Buena Nueva y la predicación de Jesucristo, según la revelación del
misterio que se ha mantenido en secreto durante largos siglos,
\footnote{\textbf{14:24} Efes 1,9; Efes 3,4-9; 1Cor 2,7} \bibleverse{25}
pero que ahora se revela, y por las Escrituras de los profetas, según el
mandamiento del Dios eterno, se da a conocer para la obediencia de la fe
a todas las naciones; \footnote{\textbf{14:25} Rom 1,5} \bibleverse{26}
al único Dios sabio, por medio de Jesucristo, a quien sea la gloria por
los siglos. Amén. \footnote{\textbf{14:26} TR coloca los versos 24-26
  después de Romanos 16:24 como versos 25-27.}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{14}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} Now accept one who is weak in faith, but not for disputes
over opinions. \bibleverse{2} One man has faith to eat all things, but
he who is weak eats only vegetables. \bibleverse{3} Don't let him who
eats despise him who doesn't eat. Don't let him who doesn't eat judge
him who eats, for God has accepted him. \bibleverse{4} Who are you who
judge another's servant? To his own lord he stands or falls. Yes, he
will be made to stand, for God has power to make him stand.
\bibleverse{5} One man esteems one day as more important. Another
esteems every day alike. Let each man be fully assured in his own mind.
\bibleverse{6} He who observes the day, observes it to the Lord; and he
who does not observe the day, to the Lord he does not observe it. He who
eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks. He who doesn't eat, to
the Lord he doesn't eat, and gives God thanks. \bibleverse{7} For none
of us lives to himself, and none dies to himself. \bibleverse{8} For if
we live, we live to the Lord. Or if we die, we die to the Lord. If
therefore we live or die, we are the Lord's. \bibleverse{9} For to this
end Christ died, rose, and lived again, that he might be Lord of both
the dead and the living. \bibleverse{10} But you, why do you judge your
brother? Or you again, why do you despise your brother? For we will all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ. \bibleverse{11} For it is
written, ``\,`As I live,' says the Lord, `to me every knee will bow.
Every tongue will confess to God.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{14:11} Isaiah
  45:23} \bibleverse{12} So then each one of us will give account of
himself to God. \bibleverse{13} Therefore let's not judge one another
any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block in
his brother's way, or an occasion for falling. \bibleverse{14} I know
and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean of itself;
except that to him who considers anything to be unclean, to him it is
unclean. \bibleverse{15} Yet if because of food your brother is grieved,
you walk no longer in love. Don't destroy with your food him for whom
Christ died. \bibleverse{16} Then don't let your good be slandered,
\bibleverse{17} for God's Kingdom is not eating and drinking, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. \bibleverse{18} For he
who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by
men. \bibleverse{19} So then, let's follow after things which make for
peace, and things by which we may build one another up. \bibleverse{20}
Don't overthrow God's work for food's sake. All things indeed are clean,
however it is evil for that man who creates a stumbling block by eating.
\bibleverse{21} It is good to not eat meat, drink wine, nor do anything
by which your brother stumbles, is offended, or is made weak.
\bibleverse{22} Do you have faith? Have it to yourself before God. Happy
is he who doesn't judge himself in that which he approves.
\bibleverse{23} But he who doubts is condemned if he eats, because it
isn't of faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin. \bibleverse{24} Now
to him who is able to establish you according to my Good News and the
preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery
which has been kept secret through long ages, \bibleverse{25} but now is
revealed, and by the Scriptures of the prophets, according to the
commandment of the eternal God, is made known for obedience of faith to
all the nations; \bibleverse{26} to the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be the glory forever! Amen.\footnote{\textbf{14:26} TR
  places verses 24-26 after Romans 16:24 as verses 25-27.}

\hypertarget{application-of-the-image-to-the-divine-structure-of-the-church}{%
\subsection{Application of the image to the divine structure of the
church}\label{application-of-the-image-to-the-divine-structure-of-the-church}}

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-a-ser-pacientes-con-los-duxe9biles-y-a-la-unidad-de-los-cristianos-basada-en-el-ejemplo-de-cristo}{%
\subsection{Exhortación a ser pacientes con los débiles y a la unidad de
los cristianos basada en el ejemplo de
Cristo}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-a-ser-pacientes-con-los-duxe9biles-y-a-la-unidad-de-los-cristianos-basada-en-el-ejemplo-de-cristo}}

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{15}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} Ahora bien, los que somos fuertes debemos soportar las
debilidades de los débiles, y no complacernos a nosotros mismos.
\footnote{\textbf{15:1} Rom 14,1} \bibleverse{2} Cada uno de nosotros
debe complacer a su prójimo en lo que es bueno, para ir edificándolo.
\footnote{\textbf{15:2} 1Cor 9,19; 1Cor 10,24; 1Cor 10,33}
\bibleverse{3} Porque ni siquiera Cristo se complació a sí mismo. Sino
que, como está escrito, ``los reproches de los que os reprochaban
cayeron sobre mí''. \footnote{\textbf{15:3} Salmo 69:9} \bibleverse{4}
Porque todo lo que se ha escrito antes, se ha escrito para que
aprendamos, a fin de que, mediante la perseverancia y el estímulo de las
Escrituras, tengamos esperanza. \footnote{\textbf{15:4} 1Cor 10,11}
\bibleverse{5} Ahora bien, el Dios de la perseverancia y del estímulo os
conceda que tengáis un mismo sentir los unos con los otros según Cristo
Jesús, \footnote{\textbf{15:5} Fil 2,2} \bibleverse{6} para que unánimes
glorifiquéis con una sola boca al Dios y Padre de nuestro Señor
Jesucristo.

\hypertarget{un-recordatorio-para-que-ambas-partes-de-la-comunidad-estuxe9n-unidas-y-tengan-una-fe-gozosa}{%
\subsection{Un recordatorio para que ambas partes de la comunidad estén
unidas y tengan una fe
gozosa}\label{un-recordatorio-para-que-ambas-partes-de-la-comunidad-estuxe9n-unidas-y-tengan-una-fe-gozosa}}

\bibleverse{7} Por tanto, aceptaos los unos a los otros, como también
Cristo os aceptó a vosotros,\footnote{\textbf{15:7} TR lee ``nosotros''
  en lugar de ``vosotros''} para gloria de Dios. \bibleverse{8} Ahora
bien, digo que Cristo se ha hecho siervo de la circuncisión por la
verdad de Dios, para confirmar las promesas dadas a los padres,
\footnote{\textbf{15:8} Mat 15,24; Hech 3,25} \bibleverse{9} y para que
los gentiles glorifiquen a Dios por su misericordia. Como está escrito,
``Por eso te alabaré entre los gentilesy cantar a tu nombre\footnote{\textbf{15:9}
  2 Samuel 22:50; Salmo 18:49} ''.

\bibleverse{10} De nuevo dice, ``Alegraos, gentiles, con su pueblo''.
\footnote{\textbf{15:10} Deuteronomio 32:43}

\bibleverse{11} de nuevo, ``¡Alabad al Señor, todos los gentiles! Que
todos los pueblos lo alaben\footnote{\textbf{15:11} Salmo 117:1} ''.

\bibleverse{12} De nuevo, Isaías dice, ``Habrá la raíz de Jesse, el que
se levanta para gobernar a los gentiles; en él esperarán los
gentiles\footnote{\textbf{15:12} Isaías 11:10} ''. \footnote{\textbf{15:12}
  Apoc 5,5}

\bibleverse{13} Que el Dios de la esperanza os llene de toda alegría y
paz en la fe, para que abundéis en la esperanza con la fuerza del
Espíritu Santo.

\hypertarget{revisiuxf3n-justificativa-del-apuxf3stol-de-la-carta-y-referencia-a-su-oficio-apostuxf3lico-para-los-gentiles}{%
\subsection{Revisión justificativa del apóstol de la carta y referencia
a su oficio apostólico para los
gentiles}\label{revisiuxf3n-justificativa-del-apuxf3stol-de-la-carta-y-referencia-a-su-oficio-apostuxf3lico-para-los-gentiles}}

\bibleverse{14} Yo mismo estoy persuadido de vosotros, hermanos míos, de
que vosotros mismos estáis llenos de bondad, llenos de todo
conocimiento, capaces también de amonestar a los demás. \bibleverse{15}
Pero os escribo con mayor audacia, en parte como recordatorio, por la
gracia que me ha sido concedida por Dios, \footnote{\textbf{15:15} Rom
  1,5; Rom 12,3} \bibleverse{16} para ser siervo de Cristo Jesús para
los gentiles, sirviendo como sacerdote de la Buena Nueva de Dios, para
que la ofrenda de los gentiles sea aceptable, santificada por el
Espíritu Santo. \footnote{\textbf{15:16} Rom 11,13} \bibleverse{17}
Tengo, pues, mi jactancia en Cristo Jesús en las cosas que pertenecen a
Dios. \bibleverse{18} Porque no me atreveré a hablar de ninguna cosa,
sino de las que Cristo ha obrado por medio de mí para la obediencia de
los gentiles, con palabras y con hechos, \footnote{\textbf{15:18} 2Cor
  3,5; Rom 1,5} \bibleverse{19} con el poder de las señales y de los
prodigios, con el poder del Espíritu de Dios; de modo que desde
Jerusalén y alrededor hasta Ilírico, he predicado plenamente la Buena
Nueva de Cristo; \footnote{\textbf{15:19} Mar 16,17; 2Cor 12,12}
\bibleverse{20} sí, poniendo como objetivo predicar la Buena Nueva, no
donde ya se nombraba a Cristo, para no edificar sobre fundamento ajeno.
\footnote{\textbf{15:20} 2Cor 10,15-16} \bibleverse{21} Pero, como está
escrito, ``Verán, a quienes no les llegó ninguna noticia de él. Los que
no han oído lo entenderán\footnote{\textbf{15:21} Isaías 52:15} ''.

\hypertarget{anuncio-de-los-pruxf3ximos-planes-de-viaje-del-apuxf3stol}{%
\subsection{Anuncio de los próximos planes de viaje del
apóstol}\label{anuncio-de-los-pruxf3ximos-planes-de-viaje-del-apuxf3stol}}

\bibleverse{22} Por eso también me han impedido estas muchas veces ir a
ti, \footnote{\textbf{15:22} Rom 1,13} \bibleverse{23} pero ahora, no
teniendo ya lugar en estas regiones, y teniendo estos muchos años el
anhelo de ir a ti, \footnote{\textbf{15:23} Rom 1,10-11} \bibleverse{24}
siempre que viaje a España, iré a ti. Porque espero veros en mi viaje y
que me ayudéis en mi camino, si antes puedo disfrutar de vuestra
compañía durante un tiempo. \bibleverse{25} Pero ahora, digo, me voy a
Jerusalén, a servir a los santos. \footnote{\textbf{15:25} Hech 18,21;
  Hech 19,21; Hech 20,22; Hech 24,17} \bibleverse{26} Porque a Macedonia
y Acaya les ha parecido bien hacer una contribución para los pobres de
los santos que están en Jerusalén. \footnote{\textbf{15:26} 1Cor 16,1;
  2Cor 8,1-4; 2Cor 8,9} \bibleverse{27} Sí, les ha parecido bien, y son
sus deudores. Porque si los gentiles han sido hechos partícipes de sus
cosas espirituales, también les deben servir en las cosas materiales.
\footnote{\textbf{15:27} 1Cor 9,11; Gal 6,6} \bibleverse{28} Así pues,
cuando haya cumplido esto y les haya sellado este fruto, seguiré por tu
camino hacia España. \bibleverse{29} Sé que cuando vaya a ustedes, iré
en la plenitud de la bendición de la Buena Nueva de Cristo.

\hypertarget{la-amonestaciuxf3n-del-apuxf3stol-a-la-iglesia-de-que-interceda-por-uxe9l}{%
\subsection{La amonestación del apóstol a la iglesia de que interceda
por
él}\label{la-amonestaciuxf3n-del-apuxf3stol-a-la-iglesia-de-que-interceda-por-uxe9l}}

\bibleverse{30} Ahora os ruego, hermanos, por nuestro Señor Jesucristo y
por el amor del Espíritu, que os esforcéis junto conmigo en vuestras
oraciones a Dios por mí, \footnote{\textbf{15:30} 2Cor 1,11; 2Tes 3,1}
\bibleverse{31} para que sea librado de los desobedientes de Judea, y
para que mi servicio que tengo para Jerusalén sea aceptable a los
santos, \footnote{\textbf{15:31} 1Tes 2,15} \bibleverse{32} para que
pueda llegar a vosotros con alegría por la voluntad de Dios, y junto con
vosotros, encontrar el descanso. \bibleverse{33} El Dios de la paz esté
con todos vosotros. Amén.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{15}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} Now we who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the
weak, and not to please ourselves. \bibleverse{2} Let each one of us
please his neighbor for that which is good, to be building him up.
\bibleverse{3} For even Christ didn't please himself. But, as it is
written, ``The reproaches of those who reproached you fell on
me.''\footnote{\textbf{15:3} Psalm 69:9} \bibleverse{4} For whatever
things were written before were written for our learning, that through
perseverance and through encouragement of the Scriptures we might have
hope. \bibleverse{5} Now the God of perseverance and of encouragement
grant you to be of the same mind with one another according to Christ
Jesus, \bibleverse{6} that with one accord you may with one mouth
glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. \bibleverse{7}
Therefore accept one another, even as Christ also accepted
you,\footnote{\textbf{15:7} TR reads ``us'' instead of ``you''} to the
glory of God. \bibleverse{8} Now I say that Christ has been made a
servant of the circumcision for the truth of God, that he might confirm
the promises given to the fathers, \bibleverse{9} and that the Gentiles
might glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, ``Therefore I will
give praise to you among the Gentiles and sing to your
name.''\footnote{\textbf{15:9} 2 Samuel 22:50; Psalm 18:49}
\bibleverse{10} Again he says, ``Rejoice, you Gentiles, with his
people.''\footnote{\textbf{15:10} Deuteronomy 32:43} \bibleverse{11}
Again, ``Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles! Let all the peoples praise
him.''\footnote{\textbf{15:11} Psalm 117:1} \bibleverse{12} Again,
Isaiah says, ``There will be the root of Jesse, he who arises to rule
over the Gentiles; in him the Gentiles will hope.''\footnote{\textbf{15:12}
  Isaiah 11:10} \bibleverse{13} Now may the God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope in the power
of the Holy Spirit. \bibleverse{14} I myself am also persuaded about
you, my brothers,\footnote{\textbf{15:14} The word for ``brothers'' here
  and where context allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers
  and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} that you yourselves are full of
goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish others.
\bibleverse{15} But I write the more boldly to you in part as reminding
you, because of the grace that was given to me by God, \bibleverse{16}
that I should be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, serving as a
priest of the Good News of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles
might be made acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit. \bibleverse{17}
I have therefore my boasting in Christ Jesus in things pertaining to
God. \bibleverse{18} For I will not dare to speak of any things except
those which Christ worked through me for the obedience of the Gentiles,
by word and deed, \bibleverse{19} in the power of signs and wonders, in
the power of God's Spirit; so that from Jerusalem and around as far as
to Illyricum, I have fully preached the Good News of Christ;
\bibleverse{20} yes, making it my aim to preach the Good News, not where
Christ was already named, that I might not build on another's
foundation. \bibleverse{21} But, as it is written, ``They will see, to
whom no news of him came. They who haven't heard will
understand.''\footnote{\textbf{15:21} Isaiah 52:15} \bibleverse{22}
Therefore also I was hindered these many times from coming to you,
\bibleverse{23} but now, no longer having any place in these regions,
and having these many years a longing to come to you, \bibleverse{24}
whenever I travel to Spain, I will come to you. For I hope to see you on
my journey, and to be helped on my way there by you, if first I may
enjoy your company for a while. \bibleverse{25} But now, I say, I am
going to Jerusalem, serving the saints. \bibleverse{26} For it has been
the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution
for the poor among the saints who are at Jerusalem. \bibleverse{27} Yes,
it has been their good pleasure, and they are their debtors. For if the
Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, they owe it
to them also to serve them in material things. \bibleverse{28} When
therefore I have accomplished this, and have sealed to them this fruit,
I will go on by way of you to Spain. \bibleverse{29} I know that when I
come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the Good
News of Christ. \bibleverse{30} Now I beg you, brothers, by our Lord
Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, that you strive together
with me in your prayers to God for me,

\hypertarget{without-love-even-the-highest-spiritual-gifts-are-worthless}{%
\subsection{Without love, even the highest spiritual gifts are
worthless}\label{without-love-even-the-highest-spiritual-gifts-are-worthless}}

\hypertarget{announcement-of-impartial-judgment-and-ruthless-judgment}{%
\subsection{Announcement of impartial judgment and ruthless
judgment}\label{announcement-of-impartial-judgment-and-ruthless-judgment}}

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-obey-the-authorities-appointed-by-god}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to obey the authorities appointed by
God}\label{exhortation-to-obey-the-authorities-appointed-by-god}}

\hypertarget{the-essence-of-love}{%
\subsection{The essence of love}\label{the-essence-of-love}}

\hypertarget{exhortations-to-the-integral-fulfillment-of-duties-especially-to-charity-as-fulfillment-of-the-law}{%
\subsection{Exhortations to the integral fulfillment of duties,
especially to charity as fulfillment of the
law}\label{exhortations-to-the-integral-fulfillment-of-duties-especially-to-charity-as-fulfillment-of-the-law}}

\hypertarget{the-perfection-of-eternal-love-against-the-fragment-of-other-graces}{%
\subsection{The perfection of eternal love against the fragment of other
graces}\label{the-perfection-of-eternal-love-against-the-fragment-of-other-graces}}

\hypertarget{the-near-end-of-the-world-warns-to-walk-in-light-and-sanctify-personal-life}{%
\subsection{The near end of the world warns to walk in light and
sanctify personal
life}\label{the-near-end-of-the-world-warns-to-walk-in-light-and-sanctify-personal-life}}

\hypertarget{final-warnings-greetings-and-blessings}{%
\subsection{Final warnings, greetings and
blessings}\label{final-warnings-greetings-and-blessings}}

\hypertarget{judgment-on-the-topic-that-moves-the-community-and-warns-against-the-unloving-condemnation-of-the-external-way-of-life-of-the-neighbor}{%
\subsection{Judgment on the topic that moves the community and warns
against the unloving condemnation of the external way of life of the
neighbor}\label{judgment-on-the-topic-that-moves-the-community-and-warns-against-the-unloving-condemnation-of-the-external-way-of-life-of-the-neighbor}}

\hypertarget{the-difference-between-prophetic-speech-and-speaking-in-tongues}{%
\subsection{The difference between prophetic speech and speaking in
tongues}\label{the-difference-between-prophetic-speech-and-speaking-in-tongues}}

\hypertarget{the-futility-and-inadequacy-of-all-incomprehensible-sound-and-speech}{%
\subsection{The futility and inadequacy of all incomprehensible sound
and
speech}\label{the-futility-and-inadequacy-of-all-incomprehensible-sound-and-speech}}

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-those-of-strong-faith-not-to-offend-those-of-weak-faith-and-to-strive-for-a-clear-conscience-in-all-they-do}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to those of strong faith not to offend those of
weak faith and to strive for a clear conscience in all they
do}\label{exhortation-to-those-of-strong-faith-not-to-offend-those-of-weak-faith-and-to-strive-for-a-clear-conscience-in-all-they-do}}

\hypertarget{the-old-testament-and-the-outside-non-christian-world-also-condemn-this-incomprehensible-speech}{%
\subsection{The Old Testament and the outside non-Christian world also
condemn this incomprehensible
speech}\label{the-old-testament-and-the-outside-non-christian-world-also-condemn-this-incomprehensible-speech}}

\hypertarget{speaker-order}{%
\subsection{Speaker Order}\label{speaker-order}}

\bibleverse{31} that I may be delivered from those who are disobedient
in Judea, and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be
acceptable to the saints, \bibleverse{32} that I may come to you in joy
through the will of God, and together with you, find rest.
\bibleverse{33} Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.

\hypertarget{against-inappropriate-speeches-by-women-in-meetings}{%
\subsection{Against inappropriate speeches by women in
meetings}\label{against-inappropriate-speeches-by-women-in-meetings}}

\hypertarget{of-the-facts-and-witnesses-by-which-the-resurrection-of-christ-is-certified}{%
\subsection{Of the facts and witnesses by which the resurrection of
Christ is
certified}\label{of-the-facts-and-witnesses-by-which-the-resurrection-of-christ-is-certified}}

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-be-patient-with-the-weak-and-to-christian-unity-based-on-the-example-of-christ}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to be patient with the weak and to Christian
unity based on the example of
Christ}\label{exhortation-to-be-patient-with-the-weak-and-to-christian-unity-based-on-the-example-of-christ}}

\hypertarget{a-reminder-for-both-parts-of-the-community-to-be-united-and-have-a-joyful-faith}{%
\subsection{A reminder for both parts of the community to be united and
have a joyful
faith}\label{a-reminder-for-both-parts-of-the-community-to-be-united-and-have-a-joyful-faith}}

\hypertarget{the-faith-and-firm-hope-of-all-christians-are-based-on-the-resurrection-of-christ-from-the-dead}{%
\subsection{The faith and firm hope of all Christians are based on the
resurrection of Christ from the
dead}\label{the-faith-and-firm-hope-of-all-christians-are-based-on-the-resurrection-of-christ-from-the-dead}}

\hypertarget{justifying-revision-of-the-apostle-of-the-letter-and-reference-to-his-apostolic-office-for-the-gentiles}{%
\subsection{Justifying revision of the apostle of the letter and
reference to his apostolic office for the
gentiles}\label{justifying-revision-of-the-apostle-of-the-letter-and-reference-to-his-apostolic-office-for-the-gentiles}}

\hypertarget{exposition-of-the-consequences-of-the-resurrection-of-christ-the-processes-in-which-the-resurrection-takes-place-until-its-completion}{%
\subsection{Exposition of the consequences of the resurrection of
Christ; the processes in which the resurrection takes place until its
completion}\label{exposition-of-the-consequences-of-the-resurrection-of-christ-the-processes-in-which-the-resurrection-takes-place-until-its-completion}}

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-apostles-upcoming-travel-plans}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the apostle's upcoming travel
plans}\label{announcement-of-the-apostles-upcoming-travel-plans}}

\hypertarget{much-of-what-christians-do-and-suffer-is-only-justified-and-understandable-when-they-believe-in-the-resurrection}{%
\subsection{Much of what Christians do and suffer is only justified and
understandable when they believe in the
resurrection}\label{much-of-what-christians-do-and-suffer-is-only-justified-and-understandable-when-they-believe-in-the-resurrection}}

\hypertarget{the-apostles-admonition-to-the-church-to-intercede-for-him}{%
\subsection{The apostle's admonition to the church to intercede for
him}\label{the-apostles-admonition-to-the-church-to-intercede-for-him}}

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{recomendaciuxf3n-de-phuxf6be-portador-de-la-carta-saludos-del-apuxf3stol-a-los-hermanos-en-roma}{%
\subsection{Recomendación de Phöbe, portador de la carta; Saludos del
Apóstol a los hermanos en
Roma}\label{recomendaciuxf3n-de-phuxf6be-portador-de-la-carta-saludos-del-apuxf3stol-a-los-hermanos-en-roma}}

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{16}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} Os encomiendo a nuestra hermana Febe, que es
sierva\footnote{\textbf{16:1} o, diácono} de la asamblea que está en
Cencreas, \bibleverse{2} para que la recibáis en el Señor de manera
digna de los santos, y la ayudéis en todo lo que necesite de vosotros,
pues ella misma también ha sido ayudante de muchos, y de mí mismo.

\bibleverse{3} Saludad a Prisca y a Aquila, mis colaboradores en Cristo
Jesús, \footnote{\textbf{16:3} Hech 18,2; Hech 18,18; Hech 18,26}
\bibleverse{4} que arriesgaron sus propios cuellos por mi vida, a
quienes no sólo doy gracias, sino también a todas las asambleas de los
gentiles. \bibleverse{5} Saludad a la asamblea que está en su casa.
Saludad a Epaeneto, mi amado, que es la primicia de Acaya para Cristo.
\bibleverse{6} Saludad a María, que ha trabajado mucho por nosotros.
\bibleverse{7} Saludad a Andrónico y a Junia, mis parientes y compañeros
de prisión, que son notables entre los apóstoles, que también estuvieron
en Cristo antes que yo. \bibleverse{8} Saludad a Amplias, mi amado en el
Señor. \bibleverse{9} Saludad a Urbano, nuestro colaborador en Cristo, y
a Estaquis, mi amado. \bibleverse{10} Saludad a Apeles, el aprobado en
Cristo. Saludad a los de la casa de Aristóbulo. \bibleverse{11} Saludad
a Herodión, mi pariente. Saludad a los de la casa de Narciso, que están
en el Señor. \bibleverse{12} Saludad a Trifena y a Trifosa, que trabajan
en el Señor. Saludad a Persis, la amada, que trabaja mucho en el Señor.
\bibleverse{13} Saludad a Rufo, el elegido en el Señor, y a su madre y a
la mía. \footnote{\textbf{16:13} Mar 15,21} \bibleverse{14} Saludad a
Asíncrito, a Flegón, a Hermes, a Patrobas, a Hermas y a los hermanos que
están con ellos. \bibleverse{15} Saludad a Filólogo y a Julia, a Nereo y
a su hermana, a Olimpas y a todos los santos que están con ellos.
\bibleverse{16} Saludaos unos a otros con un beso sagrado. Las asambleas
de Cristo os saludan. \footnote{\textbf{16:16} 1Cor 16,20}

\hypertarget{advertencia-a-los-engauxf1adores-que-causan-divisiones-y-errores-en-la-iglesia}{%
\subsection{Advertencia a los engañadores que causan divisiones y
errores en la
iglesia}\label{advertencia-a-los-engauxf1adores-que-causan-divisiones-y-errores-en-la-iglesia}}

\bibleverse{17} Os ruego, hermanos, que estéis atentos a los que causan
divisiones y ocasiones de tropiezo, en contra de la doctrina que habéis
aprendido, y que os apartéis de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{16:17} Mat
  7,15; Tit 3,10; 2Tes 3,6} \bibleverse{18} Porque los tales no sirven a
nuestro Señor Jesucristo, sino a su propio vientre; y con su discurso
suave y lisonjero engañan los corazones de los inocentes. \footnote{\textbf{16:18}
  Fil 3,19; Col 2,4} \bibleverse{19} Porque tu obediencia ha llegado a
ser conocida por todos. Me alegro, pues, por vosotros. Pero deseo que
seáis sabios en lo que es bueno, pero inocentes en lo que es malo.
\footnote{\textbf{16:19} Rom 1,8; 1Cor 14,20} \bibleverse{20} Y el Dios
de la paz aplastará pronto a Satanás bajo vuestros pies. La gracia de
nuestro Señor Jesucristo esté con vosotros.

\hypertarget{saludos-de-los-amigos-de-pablo-a-roma-y-finalmente-alabanza-a-dios}{%
\subsection{Saludos de los amigos de Pablo a Roma y finalmente alabanza
a
Dios}\label{saludos-de-los-amigos-de-pablo-a-roma-y-finalmente-alabanza-a-dios}}

\bibleverse{21} Os saludan Timoteo, mi colaborador, así como Lucio,
Jasón y Sosípater, mis parientes. \footnote{\textbf{16:21} Hech 16,1-3;
  Hech 17,6; Hech 19,22; Hech 20,4; Fil 2,19-22} \bibleverse{22} Yo,
Tercio, que escribo la carta, os saludo en el Señor. \bibleverse{23} Os
saluda Gayo, mi anfitrión y anfitrión de toda la asamblea. Os saluda
Erasto, el tesorero de la ciudad, y el hermano Cuarto. \footnote{\textbf{16:23}
  1Cor 1,14} \bibleverse{24} ¡La gracia de nuestro Señor Jesucristo esté
con todos vosotros! Amén. \bibleverse{25} \footnote{\textbf{16:25} El TR
  coloca Romanos 14:24-26 al final de Romanos en lugar de al final del
  capítulo 14, y numera estos versículos 16:25-27.} \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{16}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} I commend to you Phoebe, our sister, who is a
servant\footnote{\textbf{16:1} or, deacon} of the assembly that is at
Cenchreae, \bibleverse{2} that you receive her in the Lord in a way
worthy of the saints, and that you assist her in whatever matter she may
need from you, for she herself also has been a helper of many, and of my
own self. \bibleverse{3} Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in
Christ Jesus, \bibleverse{4} who risked their own necks for my life, to
whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of the
Gentiles. \bibleverse{5} Greet the assembly that is in their house.
Greet Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first fruits of Achaia to
Christ. \bibleverse{6} Greet Mary, who labored much for us.
\bibleverse{7} Greet Andronicus and Junia, my relatives and my fellow
prisoners, who are notable among the apostles, who were also in Christ
before me. \bibleverse{8} Greet Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.
\bibleverse{9} Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and Stachys,
my beloved. \bibleverse{10} Greet Apelles, the approved in Christ. Greet
those who are of the household of Aristobulus. \bibleverse{11} Greet
Herodion, my kinsman. Greet them of the household of Narcissus, who are
in the Lord. \bibleverse{12} Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labor in
the Lord. Greet Persis, the beloved, who labored much in the Lord.
\bibleverse{13} Greet Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and
mine. \bibleverse{14} Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas,
Hermas, and the brothers\footnote{\textbf{16:14} The word for
  ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be correctly
  translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} who are with
them. \bibleverse{15} Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister,
and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them. \bibleverse{16} Greet
one another with a holy kiss. The assemblies of Christ greet you.
\bibleverse{17} Now I beg you, brothers, look out for those who are
causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling, contrary to the
doctrine which you learned, and turn away from them. \bibleverse{18} For
those who are such don't serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly; and by their smooth and flattering speech they deceive the hearts
of the innocent. \bibleverse{19} For your obedience has become known to
all. I rejoice therefore over you. But I desire to have you wise in that
which is good, but innocent in that which is evil. \bibleverse{20} And
the God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. \bibleverse{21} Timothy, my fellow
worker, greets you, as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my relatives.
\bibleverse{22} I, Tertius, who write the letter, greet you in the Lord.
\bibleverse{23} Gaius, my host and host of the whole assembly, greets
you. Erastus, the treasurer of the city, greets you, as does Quartus,
the brother. \bibleverse{24} The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you all! Amen. \bibleverse{25} \footnote{\textbf{16:25} TR places Romans
  14:24-26 at the end of Romans instead of at the end of chapter 14, and
  numbers these verses 16:25-27.} \end{otherlanguage}
\end{paracol}
