\begin{paracol}{2} \switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-soberanuxeda-uxfanica-del-hijo-de-dios-sobre-los-mensajeros-de-dios-del-antiguo-testamento}{%
\subsection{La soberanía única del Hijo de Dios sobre los mensajeros de
Dios del Antiguo
Testamento}\label{la-soberanuxeda-uxfanica-del-hijo-de-dios-sobre-los-mensajeros-de-dios-del-antiguo-testamento}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Dios, habiendo hablado en el pasado a los padres por
medio de los profetas en muchas ocasiones y de diversas maneras,
\bibleverse{2} al final de estos días nos ha hablado por medio de su
Hijo, a quien nombró heredero de todas las cosas, por quien también hizo
los mundos. \footnote{\textbf{1:2} Sal 2,8; Juan 1,3; Col 1,16}
\bibleverse{3} Su Hijo es el resplandor de su gloria, la imagen misma de
su sustancia, y sostiene todas las cosas con la palabra de su poder, el
cual, después de habernos purificado por sí mismo de nuestros pecados,
se sentó a la derecha de la Majestad en las alturas, \footnote{\textbf{1:3}
  2Cor 4,4; Col 1,15; Heb 9,14; Heb 9,26; Mar 16,19} \bibleverse{4}
habiendo llegado a ser tan mejor que los ángeles como el nombre más
excelente que ha heredado es mejor que el de ellos. \footnote{\textbf{1:4}
  Fil 2,9; 1Pe 3,22}

\hypertarget{evidencia-del-antiguo-testamento-de-la-exaltaciuxf3n-del-hijo-de-dios-sobre-los-uxe1ngeles}{%
\subsection{Evidencia del Antiguo Testamento de la exaltación del Hijo
de Dios sobre los
ángeles}\label{evidencia-del-antiguo-testamento-de-la-exaltaciuxf3n-del-hijo-de-dios-sobre-los-uxe1ngeles}}

\bibleverse{5} Porque ¿a cuál de los ángeles dijo en algún momento, ``Tú
eres mi Hijo. ¿Hoy me he convertido en tu padre?''y otra vez, ``Seré
para él un Padre, y será para mí un Hijo?''

\bibleverse{6} Cuando vuelve a traer al primogénito al mundo dice: ``Que
todos los ángeles de Dios lo adoren''. \footnote{\textbf{1:6} Rom 8,29}
\bibleverse{7} De los ángeles dice, ``Hace vientos a sus ángeles, y sus
siervos una llama de fuego''.

\bibleverse{8} Pero del Hijo dice, ``Tu trono, oh Dios, es por los
siglos de los siglos. El cetro de la rectitud es el cetro de tu Reino.
\bibleverse{9} Has amado la justicia y odiado la iniquidad; por eso
Dios, tu Dios, te ha ungido con el aceite de la alegría por encima de
tus compañeros''.

\bibleverse{10} Y, ``Tú, Señor, en el principio, pusiste los cimientos
de la tierra. Los cielos son obra de tus manos. \bibleverse{11} Ellos
perecerán, pero tú continúas. Todos ellos envejecerán como lo hace una
prenda de vestir. \bibleverse{12} Los enrollarás como un manto, y serán
cambiados; pero tú eres el mismo. Tus años no fallarán''.

\bibleverse{13} Pero a cuál de los ángeles le ha dicho en algún momento,
``Siéntate a mi derecha, hasta que haga de tus enemigos el escabel de
tus pies?''

\bibleverse{14} ¿No son todos ellos espíritus servidores, enviados a
hacer un servicio por el bien de los que heredarán la salvación?
\footnote{\textbf{1:14} Sal 34,7; Sal 91,11-12}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-unique-sovereignty-of-the-son-of-god-over-the-old-testament-messengers-of-god}{%
\subsection{The unique sovereignty of the Son of God over the Old
Testament messengers of
God}\label{the-unique-sovereignty-of-the-son-of-god-over-the-old-testament-messengers-of-god}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{1}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} God, having in the past spoken to the fathers through the
prophets at many times and in various ways, \bibleverse{2} has at the
end of these days spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all
things, through whom also he made the worlds. \bibleverse{3} His Son is
the radiance of his glory, the very image of his substance, and
upholding all things by the word of his power, who, when he had by
himself purified us of our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, \bibleverse{4} having become as much better than the
angels as the more excellent name he has inherited is better than
theirs.

\hypertarget{old-testament-evidence-for-the-exaltation-of-the-son-of-god-over-the-angels}{%
\subsection{Old Testament evidence for the exaltation of the Son of God
over the
angels}\label{old-testament-evidence-for-the-exaltation-of-the-son-of-god-over-the-angels}}

\bibleverse{5} For to which of the angels did he say at any time, ``You
are my Son. Today I have become your father?''\footnote{\textbf{1:5}
  Psalm 2:7} and again, ``I will be to him a Father, and he will be to
me a Son?''\footnote{\textbf{1:5} 2 Samuel 7:14; 1 Chronicles 17:13}
\bibleverse{6} When he again brings in the firstborn into the world he
says, ``Let all the angels of God worship him.''\footnote{\textbf{1:6}
  Deuteronomy 32:43 LXX} \bibleverse{7} Of the angels he says, ``He
makes his angels winds, and his servants a flame of fire.''\footnote{\textbf{1:7}
  Psalm 104:4} \bibleverse{8} But of the Son he says, ``Your throne, O
God, is forever and ever. The scepter of uprightness is the scepter of
your Kingdom. \bibleverse{9} You have loved righteousness and hated
iniquity; therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of
gladness above your fellows.''\footnote{\textbf{1:9} Psalm 45:6-7}
\bibleverse{10} And, ``You, Lord, in the beginning, laid the foundation
of the earth. The heavens are the works of your hands. \bibleverse{11}
They will perish, but you continue. They all will grow old like a
garment does. \bibleverse{12} You will roll them up like a mantle, and
they will be changed; but you are the same. Your years won't
fail.''\footnote{\textbf{1:12} Psalm 102:25-27} \bibleverse{13} But
which of the angels has he told at any time, ``Sit at my right hand,
until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet?''\footnote{\textbf{1:13}
  Psalm 110:1} \bibleverse{14} Aren't they all serving spirits, sent out
to do service for the sake of those who will inherit salvation?

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{de-ahuxed-surge-la-obligaciuxf3n-de-que-obedezcamos-voluntariamente-las-palabras-que-nos-ha-dicho-este-hijo}{%
\subsection{De ahí surge la obligación de que obedezcamos
voluntariamente las palabras que nos ha dicho este
Hijo}\label{de-ahuxed-surge-la-obligaciuxf3n-de-que-obedezcamos-voluntariamente-las-palabras-que-nos-ha-dicho-este-hijo}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{2}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Por lo tanto, debemos prestar más atención a las cosas
que se escucharon, para que no nos desviemos. \bibleverse{2} Porque si
la palabra hablada por medio de los ángeles resultó firme, y toda
transgresión y desobediencia recibió un justo castigo, \footnote{\textbf{2:2}
  Hech 7,53; Gal 3,19} \bibleverse{3} ¿cómo escaparemos nosotros si
descuidamos una salvación tan grande, la cual, habiendo sido hablada al
principio por medio del Señor, nos fue confirmada por los que oyeron,
\footnote{\textbf{2:3} Heb 10,29; Heb 12,25} \bibleverse{4} testificando
Dios también con ellos, tanto por señales como por prodigios, por
diversas obras de poder y por dones del Espíritu Santo, según su propia
voluntad? \footnote{\textbf{2:4} Mar 16,20; 1Cor 12,4-11; 2Cor 12,12;
  Hech 1,2-13; Hech 10,44-45}

\hypertarget{su-humillaciuxf3n-encarnaciuxf3n-y-sufrimiento-de-muerte-no-limita-su-sublimidad}{%
\subsection{Su humillación, encarnación y sufrimiento de muerte, no
limita su
sublimidad}\label{su-humillaciuxf3n-encarnaciuxf3n-y-sufrimiento-de-muerte-no-limita-su-sublimidad}}

\bibleverse{5} Porque no sometió a los ángeles el mundo venidero, del
que hablamos. \bibleverse{6} Pero uno ha testificado en alguna parte,
diciendo, ``¿Qué es el hombre, para que pienses en él? ¿O el hijo del
hombre, que se preocupa por él? \bibleverse{7} Lo hiciste un poco más
bajo que los ángeles. Lo coronaste de gloria y honor. \bibleverse{8} Has
sometido todas las cosas bajo sus pies''. Porque al someter todas las
cosas a él, no dejó nada que no le estuviera sometido. Pero ahora
todavía no vemos todas las cosas sometidas a él. \bibleverse{9} Pero
vemos al que ha sido hecho un poco más bajo que los ángeles, Jesús, a
causa del sufrimiento de la muerte, coronado de gloria y honor, para que
por la gracia de Dios probara la muerte por todos. \footnote{\textbf{2:9}
  Fil 2,8-9}

\hypertarget{la-necesidad-de-la-humillaciuxf3n-especialmente-el-sufrimiento-de-la-muerte}{%
\subsection{La necesidad de la humillación, especialmente el sufrimiento
de la
muerte}\label{la-necesidad-de-la-humillaciuxf3n-especialmente-el-sufrimiento-de-la-muerte}}

\bibleverse{10} Porque convenía a aquel por quien son todas las cosas y
por quien son todas las cosas, al llevar a muchos niños a la gloria,
perfeccionar por aflicciones al autor de la salvación de ellos.
\footnote{\textbf{2:10} Heb 12,2} \bibleverse{11} Porque tanto el que
santifica como los santificados proceden todos de uno, por lo que no se
avergüenza de llamarlos hermanos, \footnote{\textbf{2:11} Mar 3,34-35;
  Juan 17,19; Juan 20,17} \bibleverse{12} diciendo, ``Declararé tu
nombre a mis hermanos. Entre la congregación cantaré tu alabanza''.

\bibleverse{13} De nuevo: ``Pondré mi confianza en él''. De nuevo: ``He
aquí que estoy con los hijos que Dios me ha dado''.

\hypertarget{las-beneficiosas-consecuencias-de-la-humillaciuxf3n}{%
\subsection{Las beneficiosas consecuencias de la
humillación}\label{las-beneficiosas-consecuencias-de-la-humillaciuxf3n}}

\bibleverse{14} Puesto que los hijos participaron de la carne y de la
sangre, también él participó de lo mismo, para anular por medio de la
muerte al que tenía el poder de la muerte, es decir, al diablo,
\footnote{\textbf{2:14} 2Tim 1,10; 1Jn 3,8} \bibleverse{15} y liberar a
todos los que, por temor a la muerte, estaban durante toda su vida
sujetos a esclavitud. \bibleverse{16} Porque ciertamente, no da ayuda a
los ángeles, sino que da ayuda a la descendencia de Abraham.
\bibleverse{17} Por eso estaba obligado en todo a hacerse semejante a
sus hermanos, para llegar a ser un sumo sacerdote misericordioso y fiel
en las cosas de Dios, para expiar los pecados del pueblo. \footnote{\textbf{2:17}
  Fil 2,7} \bibleverse{18} Porque habiendo sufrido él mismo la
tentación, puede ayudar a los que son tentados. \footnote{\textbf{2:18}
  Heb 4,15}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{from-there-arises-the-obligation-that-we-voluntarily-obey-the-words-that-this-son-has-said-to-us}{%
\subsection{From there arises the obligation that we voluntarily obey
the words that this Son has said to
us}\label{from-there-arises-the-obligation-that-we-voluntarily-obey-the-words-that-this-son-has-said-to-us}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{2}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore we ought to pay greater attention to the things
that were heard, lest perhaps we drift away. \bibleverse{2} For if the
word spoken through angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just penalty, \bibleverse{3} how will we escape
if we neglect so great a salvation---which at the first having been
spoken through the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard,
\bibleverse{4} God also testifying with them, both by signs and wonders,
by various works of power, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to
his own will?

\hypertarget{his-humiliation-incarnation-and-suffering-of-death-does-not-limit-his-sublimity}{%
\subsection{His humiliation, incarnation and suffering of death, does
not limit his
sublimity}\label{his-humiliation-incarnation-and-suffering-of-death-does-not-limit-his-sublimity}}

\bibleverse{5} For he didn't subject the world to come, of which we
speak, to angels. \bibleverse{6} But one has somewhere testified,
saying, ``What is man, that you think of him? Or the son of man, that
you care for him? \bibleverse{7} You made him a little lower than the
angels. You crowned him with glory and honor.\footnote{\textbf{2:7} TR
  adds ``and set him over the works of your hands''} \bibleverse{8} You
have put all things in subjection under his feet.''\footnote{\textbf{2:8}
  Psalm 8:4-6} For in that he subjected all things to him, he left
nothing that is not subject to him. But now we don't yet see all things
subjected to him. \bibleverse{9} But we see him who has been made a
little lower than the angels, Jesus, because of the suffering of death
crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God he should taste
of death for everyone.

\hypertarget{the-need-for-humiliation-especially-the-suffering-of-death}{%
\subsection{The need for humiliation, especially the suffering of
death}\label{the-need-for-humiliation-especially-the-suffering-of-death}}

\bibleverse{10} For it became him, for whom are all things and through
whom are all things, in bringing many children to glory, to make the
author of their salvation perfect through sufferings. \bibleverse{11}
For both he who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from
one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brothers,\footnote{\textbf{2:11}
  The word for ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be
  correctly translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''}
\bibleverse{12} saying, ``I will declare your name to my brothers. Among
the congregation I will sing your praise.''\footnote{\textbf{2:12} Psalm
  22:22} \bibleverse{13} Again, ``I will put my trust in him.'' Again,
``Behold, here I am with the children whom God has given
me.''\footnote{\textbf{2:13} Isaiah 8:18}

\hypertarget{the-beneficial-consequences-of-humiliation}{%
\subsection{The beneficial consequences of
humiliation}\label{the-beneficial-consequences-of-humiliation}}

\bibleverse{14} Since then the children have shared in flesh and blood,
he also himself in the same way partook of the same, that through death
he might bring to nothing him who had the power of death, that is, the
devil, \bibleverse{15} and might deliver all of them who through fear of
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. \bibleverse{16} For
most certainly, he doesn't give help to angels, but he gives help to the
offspring\footnote{\textbf{2:16} or, seed} of Abraham. \bibleverse{17}
Therefore he was obligated in all things to be made like his brothers,
that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things
pertaining to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people.
\bibleverse{18} For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is
able to help those who are tempted.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-hijo-de-dios-jesuxfas-en-su-majestad-sobre-el-ministro-de-dios-moisuxe9s}{%
\subsection{El Hijo de Dios Jesús en su majestad sobre el ministro de
Dios
Moisés}\label{el-hijo-de-dios-jesuxfas-en-su-majestad-sobre-el-ministro-de-dios-moisuxe9s}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{3}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Por tanto, santos hermanos, partícipes de una vocación
celestial, considerad al Apóstol y Sumo Sacerdote de nuestra confesión:
Jesús, \footnote{\textbf{3:1} Heb 4,14} \bibleverse{2} que fue fiel al
que lo designó, como también lo fue Moisés en toda su casa. \footnote{\textbf{3:2}
  Núm 12,7} \bibleverse{3} Pues ha sido considerado digno de más gloria
que Moisés, porque el que construyó la casa tiene más honor que la casa.
\bibleverse{4} Porque toda casa es construida por alguien; pero el que
construyó todas las cosas es Dios. \bibleverse{5} Moisés, en efecto, fue
fiel en toda su casa como siervo, para dar testimonio de lo que después
se iba a decir, \bibleverse{6} pero Cristo es fiel como Hijo sobre su
casa. Nosotros somos su casa, si mantenemos firme nuestra confianza y la
gloria de nuestra esperanza hasta el fin. \footnote{\textbf{3:6} 1Pe
  2,5; Efes 2,19}

\hypertarget{la-advertencia-del-salmista-contra-la-incredulidad-y-la-apostasuxeda}{%
\subsection{La advertencia del salmista contra la incredulidad y la
apostasía}\label{la-advertencia-del-salmista-contra-la-incredulidad-y-la-apostasuxeda}}

\bibleverse{7} Por tanto, como dice el Espíritu Santo, ``Hoy, si
escuchas su voz, \footnote{\textbf{3:7} Heb 4,7} \bibleverse{8} no
endurezcáis vuestros corazones como en la rebelión, en el día de la
prueba en el desierto, \footnote{\textbf{3:8} Éxod 17,7; Núm 20,2-5}
\bibleverse{9} donde tus padres me pusieron a prueba y me probaron, y
vio mis actos durante cuarenta años. \bibleverse{10} Por eso me disgusté
con esa generación, y dijo: ``Siempre se equivocan en su corazón, pero
no conocían mis costumbres'. \bibleverse{11} Como juré en mi ira,`No
entrarán en mi descanso'\,''. \footnote{\textbf{3:11} Heb 4,3; Núm
  14,21-23}

\bibleverse{12} Cuidado, hermanos, no sea que haya en alguno de vosotros
un mal corazón de incredulidad, apartándose del Dios vivo;
\bibleverse{13} sino que os exhortéis unos a otros de día en día,
mientras se llame ``hoy'', no sea que alguno de vosotros se endurezca
por el engaño del pecado. \footnote{\textbf{3:13} 1Tes 5,11}

\hypertarget{el-ejemplo-de-advertencia-de-los-israelitas-en-el-desierto}{%
\subsection{El ejemplo de advertencia de los israelitas en el
desierto}\label{el-ejemplo-de-advertencia-de-los-israelitas-en-el-desierto}}

\bibleverse{14} Porque hemos llegado a ser partícipes de Cristo, si
mantenemos firme el principio de nuestra confianza hasta el fin,
\footnote{\textbf{3:14} Heb 6,11} \bibleverse{15} mientras se dice,
``Hoy, si escuchas su voz, no endurezcáis vuestros corazones, como en la
rebelión''.

\bibleverse{16} Porque ¿quiénes, al oírlo, se rebelaron? ¿No fueron
todos los que salieron de Egipto guiados por Moisés? \bibleverse{17}
¿Con quiénes se disgustó durante cuarenta años? ¿No fue con los que
pecaron, cuyos cuerpos cayeron en el desierto? \footnote{\textbf{3:17}
  Núm 14,29; 1Cor 10,10} \bibleverse{18} ¿A quiénes juró que no
entrarían en su reposo, sino a los desobedientes? \bibleverse{19} Vemos
que no pudieron entrar a causa de la incredulidad.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-son-of-god-jesus-in-his-majesty-over-the-minister-of-god-moses}{%
\subsection{The Son of God Jesus in his majesty over the minister of God
Moses}\label{the-son-of-god-jesus-in-his-majesty-over-the-minister-of-god-moses}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{3}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore, holy brothers, partakers of a heavenly
calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession: Jesus,
\bibleverse{2} who was faithful to him who appointed him, as also Moses
was in all his house. \bibleverse{3} For he has been counted worthy of
more glory than Moses, because he who built the house has more honor
than the house. \bibleverse{4} For every house is built by someone; but
he who built all things is God. \bibleverse{5} Moses indeed was faithful
in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which
were afterward to be spoken, \bibleverse{6} but Christ\footnote{\textbf{3:6}
  ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} is faithful as a Son over his
house. We are his house, if we hold fast our confidence and the glorying
of our hope firm to the end.

\hypertarget{the-psalmists-warning-against-unbelief-and-apostasy}{%
\subsection{The psalmist's warning against unbelief and
apostasy}\label{the-psalmists-warning-against-unbelief-and-apostasy}}

\bibleverse{7} Therefore, even as the Holy Spirit says, ``Today if you
will hear his voice, \bibleverse{8} don't harden your hearts as in the
rebellion, in the day of the trial in the wilderness, \bibleverse{9}
where your fathers tested me and tried me, and saw my deeds for forty
years. \bibleverse{10} Therefore I was displeased with that generation,
and said, `They always err in their heart, but they didn't know my
ways.' \bibleverse{11} As I swore in my wrath, `They will not enter into
my rest.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{3:11} Psalm 95:7-11} \bibleverse{12}
Beware, brothers, lest perhaps there might be in any one of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in falling away from the living God; \bibleverse{13}
but exhort one another day by day, so long as it is called ``today'',
lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.

\hypertarget{the-warning-example-of-the-israelites-in-the-desert}{%
\subsection{The warning example of the Israelites in the
desert}\label{the-warning-example-of-the-israelites-in-the-desert}}

\bibleverse{14} For we have become partakers of Christ, if we hold the
beginning of our confidence firm to the end, \bibleverse{15} while it is
said, ``Today if you will hear his voice, don't harden your hearts, as
in the rebellion.''\footnote{\textbf{3:15} Psalm 95:7-8} \bibleverse{16}
For who, when they heard, rebelled? Wasn't it all those who came out of
Egypt led by Moses? \bibleverse{17} With whom was he displeased forty
years? Wasn't it with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the
wilderness? \bibleverse{18} To whom did he swear that they wouldn't
enter into his rest, but to those who were disobedient? \bibleverse{19}
We see that they weren't able to enter in because of unbelief.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{interpretaciuxf3n-de-la-promesa-del-salmo-sobre-el-resto-del-pueblo-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Interpretación de la promesa del salmo sobre el resto del
pueblo de
Dios}\label{interpretaciuxf3n-de-la-promesa-del-salmo-sobre-el-resto-del-pueblo-de-dios}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{4}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} Temamos, pues, que no parezca que alguno de vosotros se
ha quedado sin la promesa de entrar en su descanso. \bibleverse{2}
Porque ciertamente se nos ha anunciado la buena noticia, como a ellos
también, pero la palabra que oyeron no les aprovechó, porque no se
mezcló con la fe de los que oyeron. \bibleverse{3} Pues nosotros, los
que hemos creído, entramos en ese reposo, como él ha dicho: ``Como juré
en mi ira, no entrarán en mi reposo'', aunque las obras estaban acabadas
desde la fundación del mundo. \bibleverse{4} Porque él ha dicho esto en
algún lugar acerca del séptimo día: ``Dios descansó en el séptimo día de
todas sus obras''; \bibleverse{5} y en este lugar otra vez: ``No
entrarán en mi reposo''.

\bibleverse{6} Viendo, pues, que falta que algunos entren en ella, y que
aquellos a los que antes se les había predicado la buena nueva no
entraron por desobediencia, \bibleverse{7} vuelve a definir un día
determinado, ``hoy'', diciendo por medio de David tanto tiempo después
(tal como se ha dicho), ``Hoy, si escuchas su voz, no endurezcáis
vuestros corazones''. \footnote{\textbf{4:7} Heb 3,7}

\bibleverse{8} Porque si Josué les hubiera dado descanso, no habría
hablado después de otro día. \footnote{\textbf{4:8} Deut 31,7; Jos 22,4}
\bibleverse{9} Queda, pues, un descanso sabático para el pueblo de Dios.
\bibleverse{10} Porque el que ha entrado en su reposo ha descansado
también de sus obras, como Dios lo hizo de las suyas. \footnote{\textbf{4:10}
  Apoc 14,13}

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-final-en-referencia-a-la-seriedad-y-el-poder-de-la-palabra-de-dios}{%
\subsection{Exhortación final en referencia a la seriedad y el poder de
la palabra de
Dios}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-final-en-referencia-a-la-seriedad-y-el-poder-de-la-palabra-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{11} Procuremos, pues, entrar en ese reposo, para que nadie
caiga en el mismo ejemplo de desobediencia. \footnote{\textbf{4:11} Heb
  3,16-19} \bibleverse{12} Porque la palabra de Dios es viva y eficaz, y
más cortante que toda espada de dos filos, pues penetra hasta la
división del alma y del espíritu, de las articulaciones y de los
tuétanos, y es capaz de discernir los pensamientos y las intenciones del
corazón. \footnote{\textbf{4:12} Jer 23,29; Apoc 2,12} \bibleverse{13}
No hay criatura que se oculte a su vista, sino que todas las cosas están
desnudas y expuestas ante los ojos de aquel a quien debemos rendir
cuentas.

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-conoce-las-debilidades-humanas-por-experiencia-personal}{%
\subsection{Jesús conoce las debilidades humanas por experiencia
personal}\label{jesuxfas-conoce-las-debilidades-humanas-por-experiencia-personal}}

\bibleverse{14} Teniendo, pues, un gran sumo sacerdote que ha atravesado
los cielos, Jesús, el Hijo de Dios, aferrémonos a nuestra confesión.
\footnote{\textbf{4:14} Heb 3,1; Heb 9,11-12; Heb 10,23} \bibleverse{15}
Porque no tenemos un sumo sacerdote que no pueda compadecerse de
nuestras debilidades, sino uno que ha sido tentado en todo como
nosotros, pero sin pecado. \footnote{\textbf{4:15} Heb 2,18; Juan 8,46}
\bibleverse{16} Acerquémonos, pues, con confianza al trono de la gracia,
para recibir misericordia y hallar gracia para el auxilio en el momento
de necesidad. \footnote{\textbf{4:16} Rom 3,25; Rom 5,2}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{interpretation-of-the-promise-of-the-psalm-on-the-rest-of-gods-people}{%
\subsection{Interpretation of the promise of the psalm on the rest of
God's
people}\label{interpretation-of-the-promise-of-the-psalm-on-the-rest-of-gods-people}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{4}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Let's fear therefore, lest perhaps anyone of you should
seem to have come short of a promise of entering into his rest.
\bibleverse{2} For indeed we have had good news preached to us, even as
they also did, but the word they heard didn't profit them, because it
wasn't mixed with faith by those who heard. \bibleverse{3} For we who
have believed do enter into that rest, even as he has said, ``As I swore
in my wrath, they will not enter into my rest;''\footnote{\textbf{4:3}
  Psalm 95:11} although the works were finished from the foundation of
the world. \bibleverse{4} For he has said this somewhere about the
seventh day, ``God rested on the seventh day from all his
works;''\footnote{\textbf{4:4} Genesis 2:2} \bibleverse{5} and in this
place again, ``They will not enter into my rest.''\footnote{\textbf{4:5}
  Psalm 95:11} \bibleverse{6} Seeing therefore it remains that some
should enter into it, and they to whom the good news was preached before
failed to enter in because of disobedience, \bibleverse{7} he again
defines a certain day, ``today'', saying through David so long a time
afterward (just as has been said), ``Today if you will hear his voice,
don't harden your hearts.''\footnote{\textbf{4:7} Psalm 95:7-8}
\bibleverse{8} For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have
spoken afterward of another day. \bibleverse{9} There remains therefore
a Sabbath rest for the people of God. \bibleverse{10} For he who has
entered into his rest has himself also rested from his works, as God did
from his.

\hypertarget{final-exhortation-regarding-the-seriousness-and-power-of-the-word-of-god}{%
\subsection{Final exhortation regarding the seriousness and power of the
word of
God}\label{final-exhortation-regarding-the-seriousness-and-power-of-the-word-of-god}}

\bibleverse{11} Let's therefore give diligence to enter into that rest,
lest anyone fall after the same example of disobedience. \bibleverse{12}
For the word of God is living and active, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints
and marrow, and is able to discern the thoughts and intentions of the
heart. \bibleverse{13} There is no creature that is hidden from his
sight, but all things are naked and laid open before the eyes of him to
whom we must give an account.

\hypertarget{jesus-knows-human-weaknesses-from-personal-experience}{%
\subsection{Jesus knows human weaknesses from personal
experience}\label{jesus-knows-human-weaknesses-from-personal-experience}}

\bibleverse{14} Having then a great high priest who has passed through
the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let's hold tightly to our
confession. \bibleverse{15} For we don't have a high priest who can't be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but one who has been in all
points tempted like we are, yet without sin. \bibleverse{16} Let's
therefore draw near with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy and may find grace for help in time of need.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{con-cristo-se-encuentran-los-requisitos-necesarios-del-sumo-sacerdote-sugeridos-en-melquisedec}{%
\subsection{Con Cristo se encuentran los requisitos necesarios del sumo
sacerdote sugeridos en
Melquisedec}\label{con-cristo-se-encuentran-los-requisitos-necesarios-del-sumo-sacerdote-sugeridos-en-melquisedec}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{5}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Porque todo sumo sacerdote, tomado de entre los hombres,
es designado para los hombres en lo que respecta a Dios, para que
ofrezca tanto dones como sacrificios por los pecados. \bibleverse{2} El
sumo sacerdote puede tratar con dulzura a los que son ignorantes y se
extravían, porque él mismo está también rodeado de debilidad.
\bibleverse{3} Por eso debe ofrecer sacrificios por los pecados, tanto
por el pueblo como por él mismo. \footnote{\textbf{5:3} Lev 9,7}
\bibleverse{4} Nadie se arroga este honor, sino que es llamado por Dios,
como lo fue Aarón. \footnote{\textbf{5:4} Éxod 28,1} \bibleverse{5} Así
también Cristo no se glorificó para ser hecho sumo sacerdote, sino que
fue él quien le dijo, ``Tú eres mi Hijo. Hoy me he convertido en tu
padre''.

\bibleverse{6} Como dice también en otro lugar, ``Eres un sacerdote para
siempre, según el orden de Melquisedec''. \footnote{\textbf{5:6} Heb
  6,20}

\bibleverse{7} Él, en los días de su carne, habiendo ofrecido oraciones
y peticiones con fuerte clamor y lágrimas al que podía salvarlo de la
muerte, y habiendo sido escuchado por su temor piadoso, \footnote{\textbf{5:7}
  Mat 26,39-46} \bibleverse{8} aunque era un Hijo, aprendió la
obediencia por las cosas que sufrió. \footnote{\textbf{5:8} Fil 2,8}
\bibleverse{9} Habiendo sido perfeccionado, llegó a ser para todos los
que le obedecen el autor de la salvación eterna, \bibleverse{10}
nombrado por Dios sumo sacerdote según el orden de Melquisedec.
\footnote{\textbf{5:10} Heb 7,1}

\hypertarget{quejarse-de-la-inmadurez-la-indolencia-intelectual-y-el-atraso-de-los-lectores}{%
\subsection{Quejarse de la inmadurez, la indolencia intelectual y el
atraso de los
lectores}\label{quejarse-de-la-inmadurez-la-indolencia-intelectual-y-el-atraso-de-los-lectores}}

\bibleverse{11} Acerca de él tenemos muchas palabras que decir, y
difíciles de interpretar, ya que os habéis vuelto torpes de oído.
\bibleverse{12} Pues aunque ya deberíais ser maestros, necesitáis de
nuevo que alguien os enseñe los rudimentos de los primeros principios de
las revelaciones de Dios. Habéis llegado a necesitar leche, y no
alimento sólido. \footnote{\textbf{5:12} 1Cor 3,1-3; 1Pe 2,2}
\bibleverse{13} Porque todo el que vive de leche no tiene experiencia en
la palabra de justicia, pues es un bebé. \footnote{\textbf{5:13} Efes
  4,14} \bibleverse{14} Pero el alimento sólido es para los que ya han
crecido, que por el uso tienen sus sentidos ejercitados para discernir
el bien y el mal.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{with-christ-are-the-necessary-requirements-of-the-high-priest-suggested-in-melchizedek}{%
\subsection{With Christ are the necessary requirements of the high
priest suggested in
Melchizedek}\label{with-christ-are-the-necessary-requirements-of-the-high-priest-suggested-in-melchizedek}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{5}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} For every high priest, being taken from among men, is
appointed for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both
gifts and sacrifices for sins. \bibleverse{2} The high priest can deal
gently with those who are ignorant and going astray, because he himself
is also surrounded with weakness. \bibleverse{3} Because of this, he
must offer sacrifices for sins for the people, as well as for himself.
\bibleverse{4} Nobody takes this honor on himself, but he is called by
God, just like Aaron was. \bibleverse{5} So also Christ didn't glorify
himself to be made a high priest, but it was he who said to him, ``You
are my Son. Today I have become your father.''\footnote{\textbf{5:5}
  Psalm 2:7} \bibleverse{6} As he says also in another place, ``You are
a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.''\footnote{\textbf{5:6}
  Psalm 110:4} \bibleverse{7} He, in the days of his flesh, having
offered up prayers and petitions with strong crying and tears to him who
was able to save him from death, and having been heard for his godly
fear, \bibleverse{8} though he was a Son, yet learned obedience by the
things which he suffered. \bibleverse{9} Having been made perfect, he
became to all of those who obey him the author of eternal salvation,
\bibleverse{10} named by God a high priest after the order of
Melchizedek.

\hypertarget{complain-about-the-immaturity-intellectual-indolence-and-backwardness-of-readers}{%
\subsection{Complain about the immaturity, intellectual indolence and
backwardness of
readers}\label{complain-about-the-immaturity-intellectual-indolence-and-backwardness-of-readers}}

\bibleverse{11} About him we have many words to say, and hard to
interpret, seeing you have become dull of hearing. \bibleverse{12} For
although by this time you should be teachers, you again need to have
someone teach you the rudiments of the first principles of the
revelations of God. You have come to need milk, and not solid food.
\bibleverse{13} For everyone who lives on milk is not experienced in the
word of righteousness, for he is a baby. \bibleverse{14} But solid food
is for those who are full grown, who by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{es-una-cuestiuxf3n-de-progreso-la-recauxedda-es-peligrosa-y-puede-provocar-dauxf1os-incurables}{%
\subsection{Es una cuestión de progreso; La recaída es peligrosa y puede
provocar daños
incurables}\label{es-una-cuestiuxf3n-de-progreso-la-recauxedda-es-peligrosa-y-puede-provocar-dauxf1os-incurables}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{6}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Por lo tanto, dejando la enseñanza de los primeros
principios de Cristo, prosigamos hacia la perfección, volviendo a poner
el fundamento del arrepentimiento de las obras muertas, de la fe hacia
Dios, \bibleverse{2} de la enseñanza de los bautismos, de la imposición
de manos, de la resurrección de los muertos y del juicio eterno.
\bibleverse{3} Esto haremos, si Dios lo permite. \bibleverse{4} Porque
en cuanto a los que una vez fueron iluminados y gustaron del don
celestial, y fueron hechos partícipes del Espíritu Santo, \footnote{\textbf{6:4}
  Heb 10,26-29; 2Pe 2,20} \bibleverse{5} y gustaron de la buena palabra
de Dios y de los poderes del siglo venidero, \bibleverse{6} y luego
recayeron, es imposible renovarlos de nuevo al arrepentimiento, ya que
crucifican de nuevo al Hijo de Dios para sí mismos, y lo exponen a la
vergüenza. \bibleverse{7} Porque la tierra que ha bebido la lluvia que
viene a menudo sobre ella y produce una cosecha adecuada para los que la
cultivan, recibe la bendición de Dios; \bibleverse{8} pero si produce
espinas y cardos, es rechazada y está a punto de ser maldecida, cuyo fin
es ser quemada.

\hypertarget{confiada-esperanza-de-superar-este-angustioso-estado-de-los-lectores-y-el-peligro-que-los-amenaza}{%
\subsection{Confiada esperanza de superar este angustioso estado de los
lectores y el peligro que los
amenaza}\label{confiada-esperanza-de-superar-este-angustioso-estado-de-los-lectores-y-el-peligro-que-los-amenaza}}

\bibleverse{9} Pero, amados, estamos persuadidos de cosas mejores para
vosotros, y de cosas que acompañan a la salvación, aunque hablemos así.
\bibleverse{10} Porque Dios no es injusto, como para olvidar vuestra
obra y el trabajo de amor que habéis mostrado hacia su nombre, al servir
a los santos, y al servirlos todavía. \footnote{\textbf{6:10} Heb
  10,32-34} \bibleverse{11} Deseamos que cada uno de vosotros muestre la
misma diligencia en la plenitud de la esperanza hasta el final,
\footnote{\textbf{6:11} Heb 3,14; Fil 1,6} \bibleverse{12} para que no
seáis perezosos, sino imitadores de los que por la fe y la perseverancia
heredaron las promesas.

\hypertarget{el-fundamento-firme-de-la-esperanza-en-la-gloria-que-seguramente-se-espera-radica-en-las-confiables-promesas-de-dios}{%
\subsection{El fundamento firme de la esperanza en la gloria que
seguramente se espera radica en las confiables promesas de
Dios}\label{el-fundamento-firme-de-la-esperanza-en-la-gloria-que-seguramente-se-espera-radica-en-las-confiables-promesas-de-dios}}

\bibleverse{13} Porque cuando Dios hizo una promesa a Abraham, como no
podía jurar por nadie más grande, juró por sí mismo, \bibleverse{14}
diciendo: ``Ciertamente te bendeciré y te multiplicaré''.
\bibleverse{15} Así, habiendo soportado pacientemente, obtuvo la
promesa. \bibleverse{16} Porque los hombres ciertamente juran por uno
mayor, y en toda disputa suya el juramento es definitivo para la
confirmación. \footnote{\textbf{6:16} Éxod 22,11} \bibleverse{17} De
este modo, Dios, decidido a mostrar más abundantemente a los herederos
de la promesa la inmutabilidad de su consejo, se interpuso con un
juramento, \bibleverse{18} para que por dos cosas inmutables, en las que
es imposible que Dios mienta, tengamos un fuerte estímulo, los que hemos
huido para refugiarnos en la esperanza puesta ante nosotros.
\bibleverse{19} Esta esperanza la tenemos como ancla del alma, una
esperanza segura y firme que entra en lo que está dentro del velo,
\footnote{\textbf{6:19} Lev 16,2; Lev 16,12} \bibleverse{20} donde como
precursor entró Jesús por nosotros, convertido en sumo sacerdote para
siempre según el orden de Melquisedec. \footnote{\textbf{6:20} Heb 5,6}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{its-a-matter-of-progress-relapse-is-dangerous-and-can-cause-incurable-damage}{%
\subsection{It's a matter of progress; Relapse is dangerous and can
cause incurable
damage}\label{its-a-matter-of-progress-relapse-is-dangerous-and-can-cause-incurable-damage}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{6}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore leaving the teaching of the first principles of
Christ, let's press on to perfection---not laying again a foundation of
repentance from dead works, of faith toward God, \bibleverse{2} of the
teaching of baptisms, of laying on of hands, of resurrection of the
dead, and of eternal judgment. \bibleverse{3} This will we do, if God
permits. \bibleverse{4} For concerning those who were once enlightened
and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy
Spirit, \bibleverse{5} and tasted the good word of God and the powers of
the age to come, \bibleverse{6} and then fell away, it is impossible to
renew them again to repentance; seeing they crucify the Son of God for
themselves again, and put him to open shame. \bibleverse{7} For the land
which has drunk the rain that comes often on it and produces a crop
suitable for them for whose sake it is also tilled, receives blessing
from God; \bibleverse{8} but if it bears thorns and thistles, it is
rejected and near being cursed, whose end is to be burned.

\hypertarget{confident-hope-of-overcoming-this-distressing-state-of-readers-and-the-danger-that-threatens-them}{%
\subsection{Confident hope of overcoming this distressing state of
readers and the danger that threatens
them}\label{confident-hope-of-overcoming-this-distressing-state-of-readers-and-the-danger-that-threatens-them}}

\bibleverse{9} But, beloved, we are persuaded of better things for you,
and things that accompany salvation, even though we speak like this.
\bibleverse{10} For God is not unrighteous, so as to forget your work
and the labor of love which you showed toward his name, in that you
served the saints, and still do serve them. \bibleverse{11} We desire
that each one of you may show the same diligence to the fullness of hope
even to the end, \bibleverse{12} that you won't be sluggish, but
imitators of those who through faith and perseverance inherited the
promises.

\hypertarget{the-firm-foundation-of-hope-in-the-glory-that-is-surely-to-be-expected-lies-in-the-trustworthy-promises-of-god}{%
\subsection{The firm foundation of hope in the glory that is surely to
be expected lies in the trustworthy promises of
God}\label{the-firm-foundation-of-hope-in-the-glory-that-is-surely-to-be-expected-lies-in-the-trustworthy-promises-of-god}}

\bibleverse{13} For when God made a promise to Abraham, since he could
swear by no one greater, he swore by himself, \bibleverse{14} saying,
``Surely blessing I will bless you, and multiplying I will multiply
you.''\footnote{\textbf{6:14} Genesis 22:17} \bibleverse{15} Thus,
having patiently endured, he obtained the promise. \bibleverse{16} For
men indeed swear by a greater one, and in every dispute of theirs the
oath is final for confirmation. \bibleverse{17} In this way God, being
determined to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the
immutability of his counsel, interposed with an oath, \bibleverse{18}
that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie,
we may have a strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to take
hold of the hope set before us. \bibleverse{19} This hope we have as an
anchor of the soul, a hope both sure and steadfast and entering into
that which is within the veil, \bibleverse{20} where as a forerunner
Jesus entered for us, having become a high priest forever after the
order of Melchizedek.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-el-sumo-sacerdote-perfecto-para-siempre-seguxfan-el-orden-de-melquisedec}{%
\subsection{Jesús, el sumo sacerdote perfecto para siempre según el
orden de
Melquisedec}\label{jesuxfas-el-sumo-sacerdote-perfecto-para-siempre-seguxfan-el-orden-de-melquisedec}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{7}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Porque este Melquisedec, rey de Salem, sacerdote del Dios
Altísimo, que salió al encuentro de Abraham al volver de la matanza de
los reyes y lo bendijo, \footnote{\textbf{7:1} Gén 14,18-20}
\bibleverse{2} a quien también Abraham repartió la décima parte de todo
(siendo primero, por interpretación, ``rey de la justicia'', y luego
también ``rey de Salem'', que significa ``rey de la paz'',
\bibleverse{3} sin padre, sin madre, sin genealogía, no teniendo
principio de días ni fin de vida, sino hecho como el Hijo de Dios),
permanece sacerdote continuamente. \footnote{\textbf{7:3} Juan 7,27}

\hypertarget{melquisedec-es-muxe1s-digno-que-los-sacerdotes-levitas}{%
\subsection{Melquisedec es más digno que los sacerdotes
levitas}\label{melquisedec-es-muxe1s-digno-que-los-sacerdotes-levitas}}

\bibleverse{4} Ahora bien, considera cuán grande era este hombre, a
quien incluso Abraham el patriarca dio un décimo del mejor botín.
\bibleverse{5} Ciertamente, los hijos de Leví que reciben el oficio de
sacerdote tienen el mandato de tomar los diezmos del pueblo según la
ley, es decir, de sus hermanos, aunque éstos hayan salido del cuerpo de
Abraham, \footnote{\textbf{7:5} Núm 18,21} \bibleverse{6} pero aquel
cuya genealogía no se cuenta a partir de ellos ha aceptado los diezmos
de Abraham, y ha bendecido al que tiene las promesas. \bibleverse{7}
Pero sin ninguna disputa el menor es bendecido por el mayor.
\bibleverse{8} Aquí reciben los diezmos los que mueren, pero allí recibe
los diezmos aquel de quien se da testimonio de que vive. \bibleverse{9}
Podemos decir que, por medio de Abraham, incluso Leví, que recibe los
diezmos, ha pagado los diezmos, \bibleverse{10} pues todavía estaba en
el cuerpo de su padre cuando Melquisedec lo conoció.

\hypertarget{el-cambio-y-aboliciuxf3n-del-sacerdocio-provocado-por-el-sacerdocio-peculiar-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{El cambio y abolición del sacerdocio provocado por el
sacerdocio peculiar de
Jesús}\label{el-cambio-y-aboliciuxf3n-del-sacerdocio-provocado-por-el-sacerdocio-peculiar-de-jesuxfas}}

\bibleverse{11} Ahora bien, si la perfección fue por medio del
sacerdocio levítico (porque bajo él el pueblo ha recibido la ley), ¿qué
necesidad había de que se levantara otro sacerdote según el orden de
Melquisedec, y no fuera llamado según el orden de Aarón? \bibleverse{12}
Porque siendo cambiado el sacerdocio, es necesario que se haga también
un cambio en la ley. \bibleverse{13} Porque aquel de quien se dicen
estas cosas pertenece a otra tribu, de la cual nadie ha oficiado en el
altar. \bibleverse{14} Porque es evidente que nuestro Señor ha salido de
Judá, de cuya tribu Moisés no habló nada respecto al sacerdocio.
\footnote{\textbf{7:14} Gén 49,10; Is 11,1; Mat 1,1-3} \bibleverse{15}
Esto es aún más abundantemente evidente, si a semejanza de Melquisedec
se levanta otro sacerdote, \bibleverse{16} que ha sido hecho, no según
la ley de un mandamiento carnal, sino según el poder de una vida sin
fin; \bibleverse{17} porque está atestiguado, ``Eres un sacerdote para
siempre, según el orden de Melquisedec''. \footnote{\textbf{7:17} Heb
  5,6}

\hypertarget{la-razuxf3n-del-cambio-en-el-orden-de-los-sacerdotes-es-que-jesuxfas-deberuxeda-ser-el-garante-de-un-pacto-superior}{%
\subsection{La razón del cambio en el orden de los sacerdotes es que
Jesús debería ser el garante de un pacto
superior}\label{la-razuxf3n-del-cambio-en-el-orden-de-los-sacerdotes-es-que-jesuxfas-deberuxeda-ser-el-garante-de-un-pacto-superior}}

\bibleverse{18} Porque hay una anulación de un mandamiento anterior a
causa de su debilidad e inutilidad \bibleverse{19} (porque la ley no
hizo nada perfecto), y una introducción de una esperanza mejor, por la
cual nos acercamos a Dios. \bibleverse{20} Ya que no fue hecho sacerdote
sin prestar juramento \bibleverse{21} (pues ciertamente fueron hechos
sacerdotes sin juramento), sino con juramento por el que dice de él,
``El Señor juró y no cambiará de opinión,`Eres un sacerdote para
siempre, según el orden de Melquisedec''.

\bibleverse{22} Por tanto, Jesús se ha convertido en la garantía de un
pacto mejor. \footnote{\textbf{7:22} Heb 8,6; Heb 12,24}

\bibleverse{23} Muchos, en efecto, han sido hechos sacerdotes, porque la
muerte les impide continuar. \bibleverse{24} Pero él, por vivir
eternamente, tiene su sacerdocio inmutable. \bibleverse{25} Por eso
también puede salvar hasta el extremo a los que se acercan a Dios por
medio de él, ya que vive eternamente para interceder por ellos.
\footnote{\textbf{7:25} Rom 8,34; 1Jn 2,1}

\hypertarget{jesuxfas-como-el-sumo-sacerdote-perfecto-y-eterno}{%
\subsection{Jesús como el sumo sacerdote perfecto y
eterno}\label{jesuxfas-como-el-sumo-sacerdote-perfecto-y-eterno}}

\bibleverse{26} Porque tal sumo sacerdote nos convenía: santo, sin
culpa, sin mancha, apartado de los pecadores y hecho más alto que los
cielos; \bibleverse{27} que no tiene necesidad, como aquellos sumos
sacerdotes, de ofrecer sacrificios cada día, primero por sus propios
pecados y luego por los del pueblo. Porque esto lo hizo una vez para
siempre, al ofrecerse a sí mismo. \footnote{\textbf{7:27} Lev 16,6; Lev
  16,15} \bibleverse{28} Porque la ley nombra como sumos sacerdotes a
hombres que tienen debilidad, pero la palabra del juramento, que vino
después de la ley, nombra para siempre a un Hijo que ha sido
perfeccionado.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{jesus-the-perfect-high-priest-forever-after-the-order-of-melchizedek}{%
\subsection{Jesus, the perfect high priest forever after the order of
Melchizedek}\label{jesus-the-perfect-high-priest-forever-after-the-order-of-melchizedek}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{7}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most
High, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and
blessed him, \bibleverse{2} to whom also Abraham divided a tenth part of
all (being first, by interpretation, ``king of righteousness'', and then
also ``king of Salem'', which means ``king of peace'', \bibleverse{3}
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the Son of God),
remains a priest continually.

\hypertarget{melchizedek-is-more-worthy-than-the-levitical-priests}{%
\subsection{Melchizedek is more worthy than the Levitical
priests}\label{melchizedek-is-more-worthy-than-the-levitical-priests}}

\bibleverse{4} Now consider how great this man was, to whom even Abraham
the patriarch gave a tenth out of the best plunder. \bibleverse{5} They
indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the priest's office have a
commandment to take tithes from the people according to the law, that
is, of their brothers, though these have come out of the body of
Abraham, \bibleverse{6} but he whose genealogy is not counted from them
has accepted tithes from Abraham, and has blessed him who has the
promises. \bibleverse{7} But without any dispute the lesser is blessed
by the greater. \bibleverse{8} Here people who die receive tithes, but
there one receives tithes of whom it is testified that he lives.
\bibleverse{9} We can say that through Abraham even Levi, who receives
tithes, has paid tithes, \bibleverse{10} for he was yet in the body of
his father when Melchizedek met him.

\hypertarget{the-change-and-abolition-of-the-priesthood-caused-by-the-peculiar-priesthood-of-jesus}{%
\subsection{The change and abolition of the priesthood caused by the
peculiar priesthood of
Jesus}\label{the-change-and-abolition-of-the-priesthood-caused-by-the-peculiar-priesthood-of-jesus}}

\bibleverse{11} Now if perfection was through the Levitical priesthood
(for under it the people have received the law), what further need was
there for another priest to arise after the order of Melchizedek, and
not be called after the order of Aaron? \bibleverse{12} For the
priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a change made also in
the law. \bibleverse{13} For he of whom these things are said belongs to
another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
\bibleverse{14} For it is evident that our Lord has sprung out of Judah,
about which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood.
\bibleverse{15} This is yet more abundantly evident, if after the
likeness of Melchizedek there arises another priest, \bibleverse{16} who
has been made, not after the law of a fleshly commandment, but after the
power of an endless life; \bibleverse{17} for it is testified, ``You are
a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.''\footnote{\textbf{7:17}
  Psalm 110:4}

\hypertarget{the-reason-for-the-change-in-the-order-of-the-priests-is-that-jesus-should-be-the-guarantor-of-a-higher-covenant}{%
\subsection{The reason for the change in the order of the priests is
that Jesus should be the guarantor of a higher
covenant}\label{the-reason-for-the-change-in-the-order-of-the-priests-is-that-jesus-should-be-the-guarantor-of-a-higher-covenant}}

\bibleverse{18} For there is an annulling of a foregoing commandment
because of its weakness and uselessness \bibleverse{19} (for the law
made nothing perfect), and a bringing in of a better hope, through which
we draw near to God. \bibleverse{20} Inasmuch as he was not made priest
without the taking of an oath \bibleverse{21} (for they indeed have been
made priests without an oath), but he with an oath by him that says of
him, ``The Lord swore and will not change his mind, `You are a priest
forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{7:21}
  Psalm 110:4} \bibleverse{22} By so much, Jesus has become the
guarantee of a better covenant. \bibleverse{23} Many, indeed, have been
made priests, because they are hindered from continuing by death.
\bibleverse{24} But he, because he lives forever, has his priesthood
unchangeable. \bibleverse{25} Therefore he is also able to save to the
uttermost those who draw near to God through him, seeing that he lives
forever to make intercession for them.

\hypertarget{jesus-as-the-perfect-and-eternal-high-priest}{%
\subsection{Jesus as the perfect and eternal high
priest}\label{jesus-as-the-perfect-and-eternal-high-priest}}

\bibleverse{26} For such a high priest was fitting for us: holy,
guiltless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens; \bibleverse{27} who doesn't need, like those high priests, to
offer up sacrifices daily, first for his own sins, and then for the sins
of the people. For he did this once for all, when he offered up himself.
\bibleverse{28} For the law appoints men as high priests who have
weakness, but the word of the oath, which came after the law, appoints a
Son forever who has been perfected.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-superioridad-del-ministerio-sumo-sacerdotal-celestial-de-jesuxfas-y-el-nuevo-pacto-del-que-uxe9l-es-mediador}{%
\subsection{La superioridad del ministerio sumo sacerdotal celestial de
Jesús y el nuevo pacto del que él es
mediador}\label{la-superioridad-del-ministerio-sumo-sacerdotal-celestial-de-jesuxfas-y-el-nuevo-pacto-del-que-uxe9l-es-mediador}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{8}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} Ahora bien, en las cosas que estamos diciendo, el punto
principal es éste: tenemos tal sumo sacerdote, que se sentó a la derecha
del trono de la Majestad en los cielos, \footnote{\textbf{8:1} Heb 4,14}
\bibleverse{2} un servidor del santuario y del verdadero tabernáculo que
el Señor levantó, no el hombre. \bibleverse{3} Porque todo sumo
sacerdote está destinado a ofrecer tanto ofrendas como sacrificios. Por
lo tanto, es necesario que este sumo sacerdote también tenga algo que
ofrecer. \bibleverse{4} Porque si estuviera en la tierra, no sería
sacerdote en absoluto, ya que hay sacerdotes que ofrecen las ofrendas
según la ley, \bibleverse{5} que sirven de copia y sombra de las cosas
celestiales, tal como Moisés fue advertido por Dios cuando iba a hacer
el tabernáculo, pues le dijo: ``Mira, todo lo harás según el modelo que
se te mostró en la montaña.'' \footnote{\textbf{8:5} Col 2,17}
\bibleverse{6} Pero ahora ha obtenido un ministerio más excelente, por
cuanto es también el mediador de un pacto mejor, que sobre mejores
promesas ha sido dado como ley. \footnote{\textbf{8:6} Heb 7,22}

\bibleverse{7} Porque si aquel primer pacto hubiera sido impecable, no
se habría buscado lugar para un segundo. \bibleverse{8} Porque
encontrando faltas en ellos, dijo, ``He aquí que vienen los días'', dice
el Señor, ``que haré un nuevo pacto con la casa de Israel y con la casa
de Judá; \footnote{\textbf{8:8} Heb 10,16-17} \bibleverse{9} no según el
pacto que hice con sus padresel día en que los tomé de la mano para
sacarlos de la tierra de Egipto; porque no continuaron en mi pacto, y no
les hice caso'', dice el Señor. \footnote{\textbf{8:9} Éxod 19,5-6}
\bibleverse{10} ``Porque éste es el pacto que haré con la casa de
Israeldespués de esos días'', dice el Señor: ``Pondré mis leyes en su
mente; También los escribiré en su corazón. Yo seré su Dios, y serán mi
pueblo. \bibleverse{11} No enseñarán a cada hombre a su conciudadanoy
cada uno a su hermano, diciendo: ``Conoce al Señor''. porque todos me
conocerán, desde lo más pequeño hasta lo más grande. \bibleverse{12}
Porque seré misericordioso con su injusticia. No me acordaré más de sus
pecados y de sus actos ilícitos''.

\bibleverse{13} Al decir: ``Un nuevo pacto'', ha dejado obsoleto el
primero. Pero lo que se vuelve obsoleto y envejece está a punto de
desaparecer. \footnote{\textbf{8:13} Rom 10,4}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-superiority-of-jesus-heavenly-high-priestly-ministry-and-the-new-covenant-of-which-he-mediates}{%
\subsection{The superiority of Jesus' heavenly high priestly ministry
and the new covenant of which he
mediates}\label{the-superiority-of-jesus-heavenly-high-priestly-ministry-and-the-new-covenant-of-which-he-mediates}}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{8}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} Now in the things which we are saying, the main point is
this: we have such a high priest, who sat down on the right hand of the
throne of the Majesty in the heavens, \bibleverse{2} a servant of the
sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, not man.
\bibleverse{3} For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts
and sacrifices. Therefore it is necessary that this high priest also
have something to offer. \bibleverse{4} For if he were on earth, he
would not be a priest at all, seeing there are priests who offer the
gifts according to the law, \bibleverse{5} who serve a copy and shadow
of the heavenly things, even as Moses was warned by God when he was
about to make the tabernacle, for he said, ``See, you shall make
everything according to the pattern that was shown to you on the
mountain.''\footnote{\textbf{8:5} Exodus 25:40} \bibleverse{6} But now
he has obtained a more excellent ministry, by as much as he is also the
mediator of a better covenant, which on better promises has been given
as law. \bibleverse{7} For if that first covenant had been faultless,
then no place would have been sought for a second. \bibleverse{8} For
finding fault with them, he said, ``Behold,\footnote{\textbf{8:8}
  ``Behold'', from ``\greek{ἰδοὺ}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} the
days are coming'', says the Lord, ``that I will make a new covenant with
the house of Israel and with the house of Judah; \bibleverse{9} not
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that
I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; for they
didn't continue in my covenant, and I disregarded them,'' says the Lord.
\bibleverse{10} ``For this is the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel after those days,'' says the Lord: ``I will put my laws
into their mind; I will also write them on their heart. I will be their
God, and they will be my people. \bibleverse{11} They will not teach
every man his fellow citizen\footnote{\textbf{8:11} TR reads
  ``neighbor'' instead of ``fellow citizen''} and every man his brother,
saying, `Know the Lord,' for all will know me, from their least to their
greatest. \bibleverse{12} For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness. I will remember their sins and lawless deeds no
more.''\footnote{\textbf{8:12} Jeremiah 31:31-34} \bibleverse{13} In
that he says, ``A new covenant'', he has made the first obsolete. But
that which is becoming obsolete and grows aged is near to vanishing
away.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{la-imperfecciuxf3n-del-ministerio-sacerdotal-levuxedtico-y-la-perfecciuxf3n-o-superioridad-del-ministerio-sumo-sacerdotal-de-cristo}{%
\subsection{La imperfección del ministerio sacerdotal levítico y la
perfección (o superioridad) del ministerio sumo sacerdotal de
Cristo}\label{la-imperfecciuxf3n-del-ministerio-sacerdotal-levuxedtico-y-la-perfecciuxf3n-o-superioridad-del-ministerio-sumo-sacerdotal-de-cristo}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{9}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} Ciertamente, incluso el primer pacto tenía ordenanzas de
servicio divino y un santuario terrenal. \bibleverse{2} Se preparó un
tabernáculo. En la primera parte estaban el candelabro, la mesa y el pan
de muestra, que se llama el Lugar Santo. \footnote{\textbf{9:2} Éxod
  25,23; Éxod 25,30-31} \bibleverse{3} Después del segundo velo estaba
el tabernáculo que se llama el Santo de los Santos, \footnote{\textbf{9:3}
  Éxod 26,33} \bibleverse{4} que tenía un altar de oro para el incienso
y el arca de la alianza recubierta de oro por todos lados, en la que
había una vasija de oro que contenía el maná, la vara de Aarón que
brotaba y las tablas de la alianza; \footnote{\textbf{9:4} Éxod 16,33;
  Éxod 25,10-22; Núm 17,8-10} \bibleverse{5} y encima querubines de
gloria que cubrían el propiciatorio, de lo cual no podemos hablar ahora
en detalle.

\bibleverse{6} Así preparadas estas cosas, los sacerdotes entraban
continuamente en el primer tabernáculo, cumpliendo los servicios,
\footnote{\textbf{9:6} Núm 18,3-4; Éxod 30,10; Lev 16,2; Lev 16,14-15}
\bibleverse{7} pero en el segundo sólo entraba el sumo sacerdote, una
vez al año, no sin sangre, que ofrecía por sí mismo y por los errores
del pueblo. \bibleverse{8} El Espíritu Santo está indicando esto, que el
camino hacia el Lugar Santo no fue revelado todavía mientras el primer
tabernáculo estaba en pie. \footnote{\textbf{9:8} Heb 10,20}
\bibleverse{9} Esto es un símbolo de la época actual, en la que se
ofrecen dones y sacrificios que son incapaces, en lo que respecta a la
conciencia, de hacer perfecto al adorador, \footnote{\textbf{9:9} Heb
  7,19; Heb 10,1-2} \bibleverse{10} siendo sólo (con comidas y bebidas y
lavados diversos) ordenanzas carnales, impuestas hasta un tiempo de
reforma. \footnote{\textbf{9:10} Lev 11,1; Núm 19,1}

\bibleverse{11} Pero Cristo, habiendo venido como sumo sacerdote de los
bienes venideros, a través del mayor y más perfecto tabernáculo, no
hecho de manos, es decir, no de esta creación, \bibleverse{12} ni por la
sangre de machos cabríos y terneros, sino por su propia sangre, entró
una vez por todas en el Lugar Santo, habiendo obtenido la redención
eterna. \bibleverse{13} Porque si la sangre de los machos cabríos y de
los toros, y la ceniza de una vaquilla que rocía a los contaminados,
santifican para la limpieza de la carne, \footnote{\textbf{9:13} Núm
  19,2; Núm 19,9; Núm 19,17} \bibleverse{14} ¿cuánto más la sangre de
Cristo, que por el Espíritu eterno se ofreció a sí mismo sin defecto a
Dios, limpiará vuestra conciencia de las obras muertas para servir al
Dios vivo? \footnote{\textbf{9:14} Heb 1,3; 1Pe 1,18-19; 1Jn 1,7; Apoc
  1,5}

\hypertarget{cristo-como-mediador-de-un-nuevo-pacto-y-su-muerte-sacrificial-uxfanica-como-medio-eterno-de-su-servicio-celestial-como-sumo-sacerdote}{%
\subsection{Cristo como mediador de un nuevo pacto y su muerte
sacrificial única como medio eterno de su servicio celestial como sumo
sacerdote}\label{cristo-como-mediador-de-un-nuevo-pacto-y-su-muerte-sacrificial-uxfanica-como-medio-eterno-de-su-servicio-celestial-como-sumo-sacerdote}}

\bibleverse{15} Por eso es mediador de una nueva alianza, ya que se ha
producido una muerte para la redención de las transgresiones que había
bajo la primera alianza, a fin de que los llamados reciban la promesa de
la herencia eterna. \footnote{\textbf{9:15} Heb 12,24; 1Tim 2,5}
\bibleverse{16} Porque donde hay un testamento, necesariamente tiene que
haber la muerte del que lo hizo. \bibleverse{17} Porque el testamento
está en vigor donde ha habido muerte, pues nunca está en vigor mientras
vive el que lo hizo. \bibleverse{18} Por lo tanto, ni siquiera el primer
pacto ha sido dedicado sin sangre. \bibleverse{19} Pues cuando Moisés
pronunció todos los mandamientos para todo el pueblo según la ley, tomó
la sangre de los terneros y de los machos cabríos, con agua, lana
escarlata e hisopo, y roció tanto el libro como a todo el pueblo,
\bibleverse{20} diciendo: ``Esta es la sangre de la alianza que Dios os
ha ordenado.'' \footnote{\textbf{9:20} Núm 19,6}

\bibleverse{21} De la misma manera roció con sangre el tabernáculo y
todos los utensilios del ministerio. \footnote{\textbf{9:21} Lev 8,15;
  Lev 8,19} \bibleverse{22} Según la ley, casi todo se limpia con
sangre, y sin derramamiento de sangre no hay remisión. \footnote{\textbf{9:22}
  Lev 17,11}

\hypertarget{el-autosacrificio-uxfanico-y-sangriento-de-cristo-y-su-tremendo-significado-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-los-creyentes}{%
\subsection{El autosacrificio único y sangriento de Cristo y su tremendo
significado de salvación para los
creyentes}\label{el-autosacrificio-uxfanico-y-sangriento-de-cristo-y-su-tremendo-significado-de-salvaciuxf3n-para-los-creyentes}}

\bibleverse{23} Era, pues, necesario que las copias de las cosas
celestiales fueran purificadas con éstas, pero las cosas celestiales
mismas con mejores sacrificios que éstos. \bibleverse{24} Porque Cristo
no ha entrado en los lugares santos hechos de mano, que son
representaciones de los verdaderos, sino en el cielo mismo, para
presentarse ahora en la presencia de Dios por nosotros; \footnote{\textbf{9:24}
  Heb 7,25; 1Jn 2,1} \bibleverse{25} ni tampoco que se ofrezca a sí
mismo con frecuencia, como el sumo sacerdote entra en el lugar santo año
tras año con sangre que no es suya, \bibleverse{26} pues de lo contrario
tendría que haber sufrido con frecuencia desde la fundación del mundo.
Pero ahora, al final de los tiempos, se ha manifestado para quitar el
pecado con el sacrificio de sí mismo. \footnote{\textbf{9:26} Heb 1,3;
  1Cor 10,11; Gal 4,4} \bibleverse{27} Así como está establecido que los
hombres mueran una vez, y después de esto, el juicio, \footnote{\textbf{9:27}
  Gén 3,19} \bibleverse{28} así también Cristo, habiendo sido ofrecido
una vez para llevar los pecados de muchos, aparecerá por segunda vez, no
para ocuparse del pecado, sino para salvar a los que lo esperan
ansiosamente. \footnote{\textbf{9:28} Heb 10,10; Heb 10,12; Heb 10,14}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-imperfection-of-the-levitical-priestly-ministry-and-the-perfection-or-superiority-of-the-high-priestly-ministry-of-christ}{%
\subsection{The imperfection of the Levitical priestly ministry and the
perfection (or superiority) of the high priestly ministry of
Christ}\label{the-imperfection-of-the-levitical-priestly-ministry-and-the-perfection-or-superiority-of-the-high-priestly-ministry-of-christ}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{9}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} Now indeed even the first\footnote{\textbf{9:1} TR adds
  ``tabernacle''} covenant had ordinances of divine service and an
earthly sanctuary. \bibleverse{2} For a tabernacle was prepared. In the
first part were the lamp stand, the table, and the show bread, which is
called the Holy Place. \bibleverse{3} After the second veil was the
tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies, \bibleverse{4} having a
golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant overlaid on all
sides with gold, in which was a golden pot holding the manna, Aaron's
rod that budded, and the tablets of the covenant; \bibleverse{5} and
above it cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat, of which things
we can't speak now in detail. \bibleverse{6} Now these things having
been thus prepared, the priests go in continually into the first
tabernacle, accomplishing the services, \bibleverse{7} but into the
second the high priest alone, once in the year, not without blood, which
he offers for himself and for the errors of the people. \bibleverse{8}
The Holy Spirit is indicating this, that the way into the Holy Place
wasn't yet revealed while the first tabernacle was still standing.
\bibleverse{9} This is a symbol of the present age, where gifts and
sacrifices are offered that are incapable, concerning the conscience, of
making the worshiper perfect, \bibleverse{10} being only (with foods and
drinks and various washings) fleshly ordinances, imposed until a time of
reformation. \bibleverse{11} But Christ having come as a high priest of
the coming good things, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle,
not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation,
\bibleverse{12} nor yet through the blood of goats and calves, but
through his own blood, entered in once for all into the Holy Place,
having obtained eternal redemption. \bibleverse{13} For if the blood of
goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have
been defiled, sanctify to the cleanness of the flesh, \bibleverse{14}
how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without defect to God, cleanse your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God?

\hypertarget{christ-as-mediator-of-a-new-covenant-and-his-unique-sacrificial-death-as-the-eternal-means-of-his-heavenly-service-as-high-priest}{%
\subsection{Christ as mediator of a new covenant and his unique
sacrificial death as the eternal means of his heavenly service as high
priest}\label{christ-as-mediator-of-a-new-covenant-and-his-unique-sacrificial-death-as-the-eternal-means-of-his-heavenly-service-as-high-priest}}

\bibleverse{15} For this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant,
since a death has occurred for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first covenant, that those who have been called may
receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. \bibleverse{16} For
where a last will and testament is, there must of necessity be the death
of him who made it. \bibleverse{17} For a will is in force where there
has been death, for it is never in force while he who made it lives.
\bibleverse{18} Therefore even the first covenant has not been dedicated
without blood. \bibleverse{19} For when every commandment had been
spoken by Moses to all the people according to the law, he took the
blood of the calves and the goats, with water and scarlet wool and
hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
\bibleverse{20} saying, ``This is the blood of the covenant which God
has commanded you.''\footnote{\textbf{9:20} Exodus 24:8} \bibleverse{21}
He sprinkled the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry in the
same way with the blood. \bibleverse{22} According to the law, nearly
everything is cleansed with blood, and apart from shedding of blood
there is no remission.

\hypertarget{the-unique-and-bloody-self-sacrifice-of-christ-and-its-tremendous-meaning-of-salvation-for-believers}{%
\subsection{The unique and bloody self-sacrifice of Christ and its
tremendous meaning of salvation for
believers}\label{the-unique-and-bloody-self-sacrifice-of-christ-and-its-tremendous-meaning-of-salvation-for-believers}}

\bibleverse{23} It was necessary therefore that the copies of the things
in the heavens should be cleansed with these, but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these. \bibleverse{24} For Christ
hasn't entered into holy places made with hands, which are
representations of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in
the presence of God for us; \bibleverse{25} nor yet that he should offer
himself often, as the high priest enters into the holy place year by
year with blood not his own, \bibleverse{26} or else he must have
suffered often since the foundation of the world. But now once at the
end of the ages, he has been revealed to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. \bibleverse{27} Inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die
once, and after this, judgment, \bibleverse{28} so Christ also, having
been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time,
not to deal with sin, but to save those who are eagerly waiting for him.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{el-ejemplo-sombruxedo-y-la-insuficiencia-del-sacrificio-anual-de-reconciliaciuxf3n-del-sumo-sacerdote-levuxedtico-la-perfecciuxf3n-del-sacrificio-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{El ejemplo sombrío y la insuficiencia del sacrificio anual
de reconciliación del sumo sacerdote levítico; la perfección del
sacrificio de
Jesús}\label{el-ejemplo-sombruxedo-y-la-insuficiencia-del-sacrificio-anual-de-reconciliaciuxf3n-del-sumo-sacerdote-levuxedtico-la-perfecciuxf3n-del-sacrificio-de-jesuxfas}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{10}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Porque la ley, teniendo una sombra del bien que ha de
venir, y no la imagen misma de las cosas, no puede con los mismos
sacrificios de año en año, que ofrecen continuamente, hacer perfectos a
los que se acercan. \footnote{\textbf{10:1} Heb 8,5} \bibleverse{2} De
lo contrario, ¿no habrían dejado de ofrecerse, porque los adoradores,
una vez purificados, ya no tendrían conciencia de los pecados?
\bibleverse{3} Pero en esos sacrificios hay un recuerdo anual de los
pecados. \footnote{\textbf{10:3} Lev 16,34} \bibleverse{4} Porque es
imposible que la sangre de los toros y de los machos cabríos quite los
pecados. \bibleverse{5} Por eso, cuando viene al mundo, dice, ``No
deseabas sacrificios ni ofrendas, pero preparaste un cuerpo para mí.
\bibleverse{6} No te agradaron los holocaustos completos ni los
sacrificios por el pecado. \bibleverse{7} Entonces dije: ``He aquí que
he venido (en el rollo del libro está escrito de mí)para hacer tu
voluntad, oh Dios''.

\bibleverse{8} Antes de decir: ``Sacrificios y ofrendas y holocaustos
completos y sacrificios por el pecado no quisiste, ni te agradaron''
(los que se ofrecen según la ley), \bibleverse{9} entonces ha dicho:
``He venido a hacer tu voluntad''. Quita lo primero para establecer lo
segundo, \bibleverse{10} por cuya voluntad hemos sido santificados
mediante la ofrenda del cuerpo de Jesucristo hecha una vez para siempre.
\footnote{\textbf{10:10} Juan 17,19}

\hypertarget{el-autosacrificio-uxfanico-y-perfectamente-vuxe1lido-de-jesuxfas-hace-que-todos-los-demuxe1s-sacrificios-por-el-pecado-sean-innecesarios-porque-hizo-que-los-creyentes-fueran-completamente-perfectos-ante-dios}{%
\subsection{El autosacrificio único y perfectamente válido de Jesús hace
que todos los demás sacrificios por el pecado sean innecesarios porque
hizo que los creyentes fueran completamente perfectos ante
Dios}\label{el-autosacrificio-uxfanico-y-perfectamente-vuxe1lido-de-jesuxfas-hace-que-todos-los-demuxe1s-sacrificios-por-el-pecado-sean-innecesarios-porque-hizo-que-los-creyentes-fueran-completamente-perfectos-ante-dios}}

\bibleverse{11} En efecto, todos los sacerdotes están de pie día tras
día, sirviendo y ofreciendo a menudo los mismos sacrificios, que nunca
pueden quitar los pecados, \footnote{\textbf{10:11} Éxod 29,38}
\bibleverse{12} pero él, después de haber ofrecido un solo sacrificio
por los pecados para siempre, se sentó a la derecha de Dios,
\bibleverse{13} esperando desde entonces hasta que sus enemigos sean
puestos como escabel de sus pies. \footnote{\textbf{10:13} Sal 110,1}
\bibleverse{14} Porque con una sola ofrenda ha perfeccionado para
siempre a los santificados. \bibleverse{15} El Espíritu Santo también
nos da testimonio, pues después de decir, \bibleverse{16} ``Este es el
pacto que haré con ellosdespués de esos días'', dice el Señor, ``Pondré
mis leyes en su corazón, También los escribiré en su mente''. entonces
dice, \footnote{\textbf{10:16} Heb 8,10} \bibleverse{17} ``No me
acordaré más de sus pecados e iniquidades''. \footnote{\textbf{10:17}
  Heb 8,12}

\bibleverse{18} Ahora bien, donde está la remisión de éstos, no hay más
ofrenda por el pecado.

\hypertarget{amonestaciuxf3n-general-para-perseverar-en-la-fe-la-esperanza-y-el-amor-en-comunidad-con-toda-la-comunidad}{%
\subsection{Amonestación general para perseverar en la fe, la esperanza
y el amor, en comunidad con toda la
comunidad}\label{amonestaciuxf3n-general-para-perseverar-en-la-fe-la-esperanza-y-el-amor-en-comunidad-con-toda-la-comunidad}}

\bibleverse{19} Teniendo, pues, hermanos, la seguridad de entrar en el
lugar santo por la sangre de Jesús, \footnote{\textbf{10:19} Mat 27,51;
  Rom 5,2} \bibleverse{20} por el camino que él nos dedicó, un camino
nuevo y vivo, a través del velo, es decir, de su carne, \footnote{\textbf{10:20}
  Heb 9,8} \bibleverse{21} y teniendo un gran sacerdote sobre la casa de
Dios, \bibleverse{22} acerquémonos con un corazón verdadero en la
plenitud de la fe, teniendo nuestros corazones rociados de una mala
conciencia y teniendo nuestro cuerpo lavado con agua pura, \footnote{\textbf{10:22}
  Heb 4,16; Efes 5,26; 1Pe 3,21} \bibleverse{23} mantengamos firme la
confesión de nuestra esperanza sin vacilar, porque el que prometió es
fiel. \footnote{\textbf{10:23} Heb 4,14}

\bibleverse{24} Consideremos cómo provocarnos unos a otros al amor y a
las buenas obras, \bibleverse{25} no dejando de reunirnos, como
acostumbran algunos, sino exhortándonos unos a otros, y tanto más cuanto
veis que el Día se acerca. \footnote{\textbf{10:25} Heb 3,13; Rom
  13,11-12}

\hypertarget{advertencia-de-apostasuxeda-y-del-juicio-divino-que-golpearuxe1-a-los-que-se-burlan-de-la-gracia}{%
\subsection{Advertencia de apostasía y del juicio divino que golpeará a
los que se burlan de la
gracia}\label{advertencia-de-apostasuxeda-y-del-juicio-divino-que-golpearuxe1-a-los-que-se-burlan-de-la-gracia}}

\bibleverse{26} Porque si pecamos voluntariamente después de haber
recibido el conocimiento de la verdad, ya no queda un sacrificio por los
pecados, \footnote{\textbf{10:26} Heb 6,4-8} \bibleverse{27} sino una
temible expectativa de juicio y una ferocidad de fuego que devorará a
los adversarios. \bibleverse{28} El hombre que hace caso omiso de la ley
de Moisés muere sin compasión por la palabra de dos o tres testigos.
\footnote{\textbf{10:28} Núm 15,30; Deut 17,6} \bibleverse{29} ¿De qué
peor castigo creéis que será juzgado el que ha pisoteado al Hijo de
Dios, y ha considerado impía la sangre de la alianza con la que fue
santificado, y ha insultado al Espíritu de gracia? \footnote{\textbf{10:29}
  Heb 2,3; Heb 12,25} \bibleverse{30} Porque conocemos al que dijo: ``La
venganza me pertenece. Yo pagaré'', dice el Señor. Otra vez: ``El Señor
juzgará a su pueblo''. \bibleverse{31} Es una cosa temible caer en las
manos del Dios vivo. \footnote{\textbf{10:31} Heb 12,29}

\hypertarget{recordatorio-para-ser-fiel-y-tener-confianza-en-la-esperanza-frente-al-sufrimiento-creciente-en-vista-de-la-recompensa-prometida}{%
\subsection{Recordatorio para ser fiel y tener confianza en la esperanza
frente al sufrimiento creciente en vista de la recompensa
prometida}\label{recordatorio-para-ser-fiel-y-tener-confianza-en-la-esperanza-frente-al-sufrimiento-creciente-en-vista-de-la-recompensa-prometida}}

\bibleverse{32} Pero recordad los días anteriores, en los que, después
de ser iluminados, soportasteis una gran lucha con sufrimientos:
\footnote{\textbf{10:32} Heb 6,4} \bibleverse{33} en parte, estando
expuestos tanto a los reproches como a las opresiones, y en parte,
haciéndoos partícipes de los que eran tratados así. \footnote{\textbf{10:33}
  1Cor 4,9} \bibleverse{34} Pues ambos os compadecisteis de mí en mis
cadenas y aceptasteis con alegría el despojo de vuestros bienes,
sabiendo que tenéis para vosotros una posesión mejor y duradera en los
cielos. \footnote{\textbf{10:34} Mat 6,20; Mat 19,21; Mat 19,29}
\bibleverse{35} Por lo tanto, no desperdiciéis vuestra audacia, que
tiene una gran recompensa. \bibleverse{36} Porque necesitáis la
resistencia para que, habiendo hecho la voluntad de Dios, recibáis la
promesa. \footnote{\textbf{10:36} Luc 21,19; Sant 5,7} \bibleverse{37}
``Dentro de muy poco, el que venga, vendrá y no esperará.
\bibleverse{38} Pero el justo vivirá por la fe. Si se encoge, mi alma no
se complace en él''. \footnote{\textbf{10:38} Rom 1,17}

\bibleverse{39} Pero no somos de los que retroceden a la destrucción,
sino de los que tienen fe para la salvación del alma. \footnote{\textbf{10:39}
  1Tes 3,3}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{the-bleak-example-and-inadequacy-of-the-levitical-high-priests-annual-sacrifice-of-reconciliation-the-perfection-of-jesus-sacrifice}{%
\subsection{The bleak example and inadequacy of the Levitical high
priest's annual sacrifice of reconciliation; the perfection of Jesus'
sacrifice}\label{the-bleak-example-and-inadequacy-of-the-levitical-high-priests-annual-sacrifice-of-reconciliation-the-perfection-of-jesus-sacrifice}}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{10}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} For the law, having a shadow of the good to come, not the
very image of the things, can never with the same sacrifices year by
year, which they offer continually, make perfect those who draw near.
\bibleverse{2} Or else wouldn't they have ceased to be offered, because
the worshipers, having been once cleansed, would have had no more
consciousness of sins? \bibleverse{3} But in those sacrifices there is a
yearly reminder of sins. \bibleverse{4} For it is impossible that the
blood of bulls and goats should take away sins. \bibleverse{5} Therefore
when he comes into the world, he says, ``You didn't desire sacrifice and
offering, but you prepared a body for me. \bibleverse{6} You had no
pleasure in whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin. \bibleverse{7}
Then I said, `Behold, I have come (in the scroll of the book it is
written of me) to do your will, O God.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{10:7} Psalm
  40:6-8} \bibleverse{8} Previously saying, ``Sacrifices and offerings
and whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin you didn't desire,
neither had pleasure in them'' (those which are offered according to the
law), \bibleverse{9} then he has said, ``Behold, I have come to do your
will.'' He takes away the first, that he may establish the second,
\bibleverse{10} by which will we have been sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.

\hypertarget{jesus-unique-and-perfectly-valid-self-sacrifice-makes-all-other-sacrifices-for-sin-unnecessary-because-it-made-believers-completely-perfect-before-god}{%
\subsection{Jesus' unique and perfectly valid self-sacrifice makes all
other sacrifices for sin unnecessary because it made believers
completely perfect before
God}\label{jesus-unique-and-perfectly-valid-self-sacrifice-makes-all-other-sacrifices-for-sin-unnecessary-because-it-made-believers-completely-perfect-before-god}}

\bibleverse{11} Every priest indeed stands day by day serving and
offering often the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins,
\bibleverse{12} but he, when he had offered one sacrifice for sins
forever, sat down on the right hand of God, \bibleverse{13} from that
time waiting until his enemies are made the footstool of his feet.
\bibleverse{14} For by one offering he has perfected forever those who
are being sanctified. \bibleverse{15} The Holy Spirit also testifies to
us, for after saying, \bibleverse{16} ``This is the covenant that I will
make with them after those days,'' says the Lord, ``I will put my laws
on their heart, I will also write them on their mind;''\footnote{\textbf{10:16}
  Jeremiah 31:33} then he says, \bibleverse{17} ``I will remember their
sins and their iniquities no more.''\footnote{\textbf{10:17} Jeremiah
  31:34} \bibleverse{18} Now where remission of these is, there is no
more offering for sin.

\hypertarget{general-warning-to-persevere-in-faith-hope-and-love-in-community-with-the-whole-community}{%
\subsection{General warning to persevere in faith, hope and love, in
community with the whole
community}\label{general-warning-to-persevere-in-faith-hope-and-love-in-community-with-the-whole-community}}

\bibleverse{19} Having therefore, brothers, boldness to enter into the
holy place by the blood of Jesus, \bibleverse{20} by the way which he
dedicated for us, a new and living way, through the veil, that is to
say, his flesh, \bibleverse{21} and having a great priest over God's
house, \bibleverse{22} let's draw near with a true heart in fullness of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and having
our body washed with pure water, \bibleverse{23} let's hold fast the
confession of our hope without wavering; for he who promised is
faithful. \bibleverse{24} Let's consider how to provoke one another to
love and good works, \bibleverse{25} not forsaking our own assembling
together, as the custom of some is, but exhorting one another, and so
much the more as you see the Day approaching.

\hypertarget{warning-of-apostasy-and-divine-judgment-that-will-strike-those-who-mock-grace}{%
\subsection{Warning of apostasy and divine judgment that will strike
those who mock
grace}\label{warning-of-apostasy-and-divine-judgment-that-will-strike-those-who-mock-grace}}

\bibleverse{26} For if we sin willfully after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for sins,
\bibleverse{27} but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and a
fierceness of fire which will devour the adversaries. \bibleverse{28} A
man who disregards Moses' law dies without compassion on the word of two
or three witnesses. \bibleverse{29} How much worse punishment do you
think he will be judged worthy of who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the blood of the covenant with which he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and has insulted the Spirit of grace?
\bibleverse{30} For we know him who said, ``Vengeance belongs to me. I
will repay,'' says the Lord.\footnote{\textbf{10:30} Deuteronomy 32:35}
Again, ``The Lord will judge his people.''\footnote{\textbf{10:30}
  Deuteronomy 32:36; Psalm 135:14} \bibleverse{31} It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.

\hypertarget{reminder-to-be-faithful-and-confident-in-hope-in-the-face-of-increasing-suffering-in-view-of-the-promised-reward}{%
\subsection{Reminder to be faithful and confident in hope in the face of
increasing suffering in view of the promised
reward}\label{reminder-to-be-faithful-and-confident-in-hope-in-the-face-of-increasing-suffering-in-view-of-the-promised-reward}}

\bibleverse{32} But remember the former days, in which, after you were
enlightened, you endured a great struggle with sufferings:
\bibleverse{33} partly, being exposed to both reproaches and
oppressions, and partly, becoming partakers with those who were treated
so. \bibleverse{34} For you both had compassion on me in my chains and
joyfully accepted the plundering of your possessions, knowing that you
have for yourselves a better possession and an enduring one in the
heavens. \bibleverse{35} Therefore don't throw away your boldness, which
has a great reward. \bibleverse{36} For you need endurance so that,
having done the will of God, you may receive the promise.
\bibleverse{37} ``In a very little while, he who comes will come and
will not wait. \bibleverse{38} But the righteous one will live by faith.
If he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him.''\footnote{\textbf{10:38}
  Habakkuk 2:3-4} \bibleverse{39} But we are not of those who shrink
back to destruction, but of those who have faith to the saving of the
soul.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{11}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Ahora bien, la fe es la certeza de lo que se espera, la
prueba de lo que no se ve. \footnote{\textbf{11:1} 2Cor 5,7}

\hypertarget{modelos-del-antiguo-testamento-de-tal-fe}{%
\subsection{Modelos del Antiguo Testamento de tal
fe}\label{modelos-del-antiguo-testamento-de-tal-fe}}

\bibleverse{2} Pues con esto, los ancianos obtuvieron la aprobación.
\bibleverse{3} Por la fe entendemos que el universo ha sido creado por
la palabra de Dios, de modo que lo que se ve no ha sido hecho de cosas
visibles. \footnote{\textbf{11:3} Gén 1,1}

\hypertarget{tres-ejemplos-de-huxe9roes-de-la-fe-de-la-uxe9poca-de-los-antepasados-de-abel-a-nouxe9}{%
\subsection{Tres ejemplos de héroes de la fe de la época de los
antepasados \hspace{0pt}\hspace{0pt}de Abel a
Noé}\label{tres-ejemplos-de-huxe9roes-de-la-fe-de-la-uxe9poca-de-los-antepasados-de-abel-a-nouxe9}}

\bibleverse{4} Por la fe, Abel ofreció a Dios un sacrificio más
excelente que el de Caín, por el cual se le dio testimonio de que era
justo, dando Dios testimonio con respecto a sus dones; y por él, estando
muerto, todavía habla. \footnote{\textbf{11:4} Gén 4,4}

\bibleverse{5} Por la fe, Enoc fue trasladado para no ver la muerte, y
no fue encontrado, porque Dios lo trasladó. Pues se le ha dado
testimonio de que antes de su traslado había sido agradable a Dios.
\footnote{\textbf{11:5} Gén 5,24} \bibleverse{6} Sin fe es imposible
agradar a Dios, pues el que se acerca a él debe creer que existe y que
es remunerador de los que lo buscan.

\bibleverse{7} Por la fe, Noé, advertido de cosas que aún no se veían,
movido por un temor piadoso, preparó una nave para la salvación de su
casa, mediante la cual condenó al mundo y se hizo heredero de la
justicia que es según la fe. \footnote{\textbf{11:7} Gén 6,8-9; Gén
  6,13-22}

\hypertarget{ejemplos-de-la-uxe9poca-de-abraham-y-su-familia}{%
\subsection{Ejemplos de la época de Abraham y su
familia}\label{ejemplos-de-la-uxe9poca-de-abraham-y-su-familia}}

\bibleverse{8} Por la fe, Abraham, cuando fue llamado, obedeció para
salir al lugar que iba a recibir como herencia. Salió sin saber a dónde
iba. \footnote{\textbf{11:8} Gén 12,1-21} \bibleverse{9} Por la fe vivió
como un extranjero en la tierra prometida, como en una tierra que no era
la suya, habitando en tiendas con Isaac y Jacob, herederos con él de la
misma promesa. \bibleverse{10} Porque buscaba la ciudad que tiene
fundamentos, cuyo constructor y artífice es Dios.

\bibleverse{11} Por la fe, hasta la misma Sara recibió poder para
concebir, y dio a luz a un niño cuando ya había pasado la edad, ya que
consideraba fiel al que había prometido. \bibleverse{12} Por tanto,
tantos como las estrellas del cielo en multitud, y tan innumerables como
la arena que está a la orilla del mar, fueron engendrados por un solo
hombre, y él como muerto.

\bibleverse{13} Todos estos murieron en la fe, sin haber recibido las
promesas, pero habiéndolas visto y abrazado de lejos, y habiendo
confesado que eran extranjeros y peregrinos en la tierra. \footnote{\textbf{11:13}
  Gén 23,4; Gén 47,9} \bibleverse{14} Porque los que dicen tales cosas
dejan claro que buscan un país propio. \bibleverse{15} Si en verdad
hubieran pensado en la patria de la que salieron, habrían tenido tiempo
suficiente para regresar. \bibleverse{16} Pero ahora desean un país
mejor, es decir, uno celestial. Por eso Dios no se avergüenza de ellos,
para ser llamado su Dios, pues les ha preparado una ciudad. \footnote{\textbf{11:16}
  Éxod 3,6}

\bibleverse{17} Por la fe, Abraham, siendo probado, ofreció a Isaac. Sí,
el que había recibido gustosamente las promesas ofrecía a su \footnote{\textbf{11:17}
  TR lee ``Él'' en lugar de ``Ellos''} hijo unigénito, \footnote{\textbf{11:17}
  Gén 22,1; Sant 2,21} \bibleverse{18} al que se le dijo: ``Tu
descendencia será contada como de Isaac'', \bibleverse{19} concluyendo
que Dios es capaz de resucitar incluso de entre los muertos. En sentido
figurado, también lo recibió de entre los muertos.

\bibleverse{20} Por la fe, Isaac bendijo a Jacob y a Esaú, incluso en lo
que respecta a las cosas por venir. \footnote{\textbf{11:20} Gén 27,1;
  Gén 48,1-48; Gén 50,1-50}

\bibleverse{21} Por la fe, Jacob, cuando estaba muriendo, bendijo a cada
uno de los hijos de José, y adoró apoyándose en la punta de su bastón.

\bibleverse{22} Por la fe, José, cuando se acercaba su fin, hizo mención
de la partida de los hijos de Israel y dio instrucciones sobre sus
huesos.

\hypertarget{ejemplos-de-la-uxe9poca-de-moisuxe9s-y-josuuxe9}{%
\subsection{Ejemplos de la época de Moisés y
Josué}\label{ejemplos-de-la-uxe9poca-de-moisuxe9s-y-josuuxe9}}

\bibleverse{23} Por la fe, Moisés, cuando nació, fue escondido durante
tres meses por sus padres, porque vieron que era un niño hermoso; y no
tuvieron miedo del mandato del rey. \footnote{\textbf{11:23} Éxod 2,1;
  Éxod 12,1-12; Éxod 14,1-14}

\bibleverse{24} Por la fe, Moisés, una vez crecido, rehusó ser llamado
hijo de la hija del Faraón, \bibleverse{25} prefiriendo compartir los
malos tratos con el pueblo de Dios que gozar por un tiempo de los
placeres del pecado, \bibleverse{26} considerando que el oprobio de
Cristo era mayor riqueza que los tesoros de Egipto, pues esperaba la
recompensa. \bibleverse{27} Por la fe salió de Egipto, sin temer la ira
del rey; pues aguantó como quien ve al que es invisible. \bibleverse{28}
Por la fe guardó la Pascua y la aspersión de la sangre, para que el
destructor de los primogénitos no los tocara.

\bibleverse{29} Por la fe pasaron el Mar Rojo como por tierra firme.
Cuando los egipcios intentaron hacerlo, fueron tragados.

\bibleverse{30} Por la fe, las murallas de Jericó se derrumbaron después
de haber sido rodeadas durante siete días.

\bibleverse{31} Por la fe, Rahab la prostituta no pereció con los
desobedientes, habiendo recibido a los espías en paz.

\hypertarget{ejemplos-de-huxe9roes-de-la-fe-de-la-historia-posterior-de-israel}{%
\subsection{Ejemplos de héroes de la fe de la historia posterior de
Israel}\label{ejemplos-de-huxe9roes-de-la-fe-de-la-historia-posterior-de-israel}}

\bibleverse{32} ¿Qué más puedo decir? Porque me faltaría tiempo si
contara lo de Gedeón, Barac, Sansón, Jefté, David, Samuel y los
profetas, \bibleverse{33} que por la fe sometieron reinos, obraron la
justicia, obtuvieron promesas, taparon la boca de los leones,
\bibleverse{34} apagaron el poder del fuego, escaparon del filo de la
espada, de la debilidad se hicieron fuertes, se hicieron poderosos en la
guerra e hicieron huir a los ejércitos extranjeros. \bibleverse{35} Las
mujeres recibieron a sus muertos por resurrección. Otros fueron
torturados, no aceptando su liberación, para obtener una mejor
resurrección. \bibleverse{36} Otros fueron juzgados por medio de burlas
y azotes, sí, más aún, por medio de prisiones y encarcelamientos.
\bibleverse{37} Fueron apedreados. Fueron aserrados. Fueron tentados.
Fueron asesinados con la espada. Anduvieron por ahí con pieles de oveja
y de cabra, desamparados, afligidos, maltratados, \bibleverse{38} de los
que el mundo no era digno, vagando por los desiertos, los montes, las
cuevas y los agujeros de la tierra.

\bibleverse{39} Todos estos, habiendo sido alabados por su fe, no
recibieron la promesa, \bibleverse{40} habiendo provisto Dios algo mejor
respecto a nosotros, para que sin nosotros no fueran perfeccionados.

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{11}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, proof of
things not seen.

\hypertarget{old-testament-models-of-such-faith}{%
\subsection{Old Testament models of such
faith}\label{old-testament-models-of-such-faith}}

\bibleverse{2} For by this, the elders obtained approval. \bibleverse{3}
By faith we understand that the universe has been framed by the word of
God, so that what is seen has not been made out of things which are
visible.

\hypertarget{three-examples-of-heroes-of-the-faith-from-the-time-of-the-ancestors-from-abel-to-nouxe9}{%
\subsection{Three examples of heroes of the faith from the time of the
ancestors from Abel to
Noé}\label{three-examples-of-heroes-of-the-faith-from-the-time-of-the-ancestors-from-abel-to-nouxe9}}

\bibleverse{4} By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice
than Cain, through which he had testimony given to him that he was
righteous, God testifying with respect to his gifts; and through it he,
being dead, still speaks. \bibleverse{5} By faith Enoch was taken away,
so that he wouldn't see death, and he was not found, because God
translated him. For he has had testimony given to him that before his
translation he had been well pleasing to God. \bibleverse{6} Without
faith it is impossible to be well pleasing to him, for he who comes to
God must believe that he exists, and that he is a rewarder of those who
seek him. \bibleverse{7} By faith Noah, being warned about things not
yet seen, moved with godly fear,\footnote{\textbf{11:7} or, reverence}
prepared a ship for the saving of his house, through which he condemned
the world and became heir of the righteousness which is according to
faith.

\hypertarget{examples-from-the-time-of-abraham-and-his-family}{%
\subsection{Examples from the time of Abraham and his
family}\label{examples-from-the-time-of-abraham-and-his-family}}

\bibleverse{8} By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed to go out to
the place which he was to receive for an inheritance. He went out, not
knowing where he went. \bibleverse{9} By faith he lived as an alien in
the land of promise, as in a land not his own, dwelling in tents with
Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise. \bibleverse{10}
For he was looking for the city which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God. \bibleverse{11} By faith even Sarah herself received power
to conceive, and she bore a child when she was past age, since she
counted him faithful who had promised. \bibleverse{12} Therefore as many
as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as innumerable as the sand
which is by the sea shore, were fathered by one man, and him as good as
dead. \bibleverse{13} These all died in faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen\footnote{\textbf{11:13} TR adds ``and being
  convinced of''} them and embraced them from afar, and having confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. \bibleverse{14} For
those who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a country
of their own. \bibleverse{15} If indeed they had been thinking of that
country from which they went out, they would have had enough time to
return. \bibleverse{16} But now they desire a better country, that is, a
heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their
God, for he has prepared a city for them. \bibleverse{17} By faith,
Abraham, being tested, offered up Isaac. Yes, he who had gladly received
the promises was offering up his only born\footnote{\textbf{11:17} The
  phrase ``only born'' is from the Greek word ``\greek{μονογενη}'',
  which is sometimes translated ``only begotten'' or ``one and only''.}
son, \bibleverse{18} to whom it was said, ``Your offspring will be
accounted as from Isaac,'' \footnote{\textbf{11:18} Genesis 21:12}
\bibleverse{19} concluding that God is able to raise up even from the
dead. Figuratively speaking, he also did receive him back from the dead.
\bibleverse{20} By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, even concerning
things to come. \bibleverse{21} By faith Jacob, when he was dying,
blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshiped, leaning on the top of
his staff. \bibleverse{22} By faith Joseph, when his end was near, made
mention of the departure of the children of Israel, and gave
instructions concerning his bones.

\hypertarget{examples-from-the-time-of-moses-and-joshua}{%
\subsection{Examples from the time of Moses and
Joshua}\label{examples-from-the-time-of-moses-and-joshua}}

\bibleverse{23} By faith Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three
months by his parents, because they saw that he was a beautiful child;
and they were not afraid of the king's commandment. \bibleverse{24} By
faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh's daughter, \bibleverse{25} choosing rather to share ill
treatment with God's people than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
time, \bibleverse{26} considering the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt; for he looked to the reward.
\bibleverse{27} By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
king; for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. \bibleverse{28} By
faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, that the
destroyer of the firstborn should not touch them. \bibleverse{29} By
faith they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land. When the Egyptians
tried to do so, they were swallowed up. \bibleverse{30} By faith the
walls of Jericho fell down after they had been encircled for seven days.
\bibleverse{31} By faith Rahab the prostitute didn't perish with those
who were disobedient, having received the spies in peace.

\hypertarget{examples-of-heroes-of-the-faith-from-israels-later-history}{%
\subsection{Examples of Heroes of the Faith from Israel's Later
History}\label{examples-of-heroes-of-the-faith-from-israels-later-history}}

\bibleverse{32} What more shall I say? For the time would fail me if I
told of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel, and the
prophets--- \bibleverse{33} who through faith subdued kingdoms, worked
out righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
lions,\footnote{\textbf{11:33} Daniel 6:22-23} \bibleverse{34} quenched
the power of fire,\footnote{\textbf{11:34} Daniel 3:1-30} escaped the
edge of the sword,\footnote{\textbf{11:34} 1 Kings 19:1-3; 2 Kings
  6:31--7:20} from weakness were made strong, grew mighty in war, and
caused foreign armies to flee. \bibleverse{35} Women received their dead
by resurrection.\footnote{\textbf{11:35} 1 Kings 17:17-23; 2 Kings
  4:32-37} Others were tortured, not accepting their deliverance, that
they might obtain a better resurrection. \bibleverse{36} Others were
tried by mocking and scourging, yes, moreover by bonds and imprisonment.
\bibleverse{37} They were stoned.\footnote{\textbf{11:37} 2 Chronicles
  24:20-21} They were sawn apart. They were tempted. They were slain
with the sword.\footnote{\textbf{11:37} Jeremiah 26:20-23; 1 Kings 19:10}
They went around in sheep skins and in goat skins; being destitute,
afflicted, ill-treated--- \bibleverse{38} of whom the world was not
worthy---wandering in deserts, mountains, caves, and the holes of the
earth. \bibleverse{39} These all, having been commended for their faith,
didn't receive the promise, \bibleverse{40} God having provided some
better thing concerning us, so that apart from us they should not be
made perfect.

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{exhortaciuxf3n-a-mantener-la-fidelidad-especialmente-con-respecto-al-ejemplo-de-jesuxfas}{%
\subsection{Exhortación a mantener la fidelidad, especialmente con
respecto al ejemplo de
Jesús}\label{exhortaciuxf3n-a-mantener-la-fidelidad-especialmente-con-respecto-al-ejemplo-de-jesuxfas}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{12}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Por tanto, nosotros también, viéndonos rodeados de una
nube tan grande de testigos, despojémonos de todo peso y del pecado que
tan fácilmente nos enreda, y corramos con perseverancia la carrera que
tenemos por delante, \footnote{\textbf{12:1} 1Cor 9,24} \bibleverse{2}
mirando a Jesús, el autor y el perfeccionador de la fe, que por el gozo
que le fue propuesto soportó la cruz, despreciando su vergüenza, y se ha
sentado a la derecha del trono de Dios. \footnote{\textbf{12:2} Heb
  5,8-9; Fil 2,8; Fil 2,10}

\bibleverse{3} Porque considerad al que ha soportado tal contradicción
de los pecadores contra sí mismo, para que no os canséis, desfalleciendo
en vuestras almas. \footnote{\textbf{12:3} Luc 2,34; Mat 26,67}

\hypertarget{recordatorio-para-permitir-que-los-desafuxedos-del-sufrimiento-sirvan-como-medio-para-promover-la-vida-de-fe}{%
\subsection{Recordatorio para permitir que los desafíos del sufrimiento
sirvan como medio para promover la vida de
fe}\label{recordatorio-para-permitir-que-los-desafuxedos-del-sufrimiento-sirvan-como-medio-para-promover-la-vida-de-fe}}

\bibleverse{4} Todavía no habéis resistido hasta la sangre, luchando
contra el pecado. \bibleverse{5} Habéis olvidado la exhortación que
razona con vosotros como con los niños, ``Hijo mío, no tomes a la ligera
el castigo del Señor, ni desmayes cuando seas reprendido por él;
\bibleverse{6} porque al que el Señor ama, lo disciplina, y castiga a
todo hijo que recibe''. \footnote{\textbf{12:6} Apoc 3,19}

\bibleverse{7} Es por la disciplina que ustedes soportan. Dios os trata
como a hijos, pues ¿qué hijo hay al que su padre no disciplina?
\bibleverse{8} Pero si no tenéis disciplina, de la que todos habéis sido
hechos partícipes, entonces sois ilegítimos, y no hijos. \bibleverse{9}
Además, tuvimos a los padres de nuestra carne para que nos castigaran, y
les hicimos caso. ¿No será mejor que nos sometamos al Padre de los
espíritus y vivamos? \bibleverse{10} Porque ciertamente ellos nos
disciplinaron por unos días como les pareció bien, pero él para nuestro
provecho, para que seamos partícipes de su santidad. \bibleverse{11}
Todo castigo parece al presente no ser alegre sino penoso; sin embargo,
después da el fruto apacible de la justicia a los que han sido
entrenados por él. \footnote{\textbf{12:11} 2Cor 4,17-18}

\hypertarget{una-advertencia-a-la-comunidad-para-que-se-levante-y-cuide-a-los-miembros-duxe9biles-y-vulnerables}{%
\subsection{Una advertencia a la comunidad para que se levante y cuide a
los miembros débiles y
vulnerables}\label{una-advertencia-a-la-comunidad-para-que-se-levante-y-cuide-a-los-miembros-duxe9biles-y-vulnerables}}

\bibleverse{12} Por tanto, levantad las manos que cuelgan y las rodillas
débiles, \footnote{\textbf{12:12} Is 35,3} \bibleverse{13} y haced
caminos rectos para vuestros pies, para que lo que está cojo no se
disloque, sino que se cure. \footnote{\textbf{12:13} Prov 4,26-27}

\bibleverse{14} Seguid la paz con todos los hombres, y la santificación
sin la cual nadie verá al Señor, \footnote{\textbf{12:14} Rom 12,18;
  2Tim 2,22} \bibleverse{15} mirando atentamente para que no haya
ninguno que esté desprovisto de la gracia de Dios, para que ninguna raíz
de amargura que brote os moleste y muchos sean contaminados por ella,
\footnote{\textbf{12:15} Deut 29,18} \bibleverse{16} para que no haya
ningún inmoral sexual o profano, como Esaú, que vendió su primogenitura
por una sola comida. \footnote{\textbf{12:16} Gén 25,33-34}
\bibleverse{17} Porque sabéis que aun cuando después deseó heredar la
bendición, fue rechazado, pues no encontró lugar para cambiar de
opinión, aunque lo buscó diligentemente con lágrimas. \footnote{\textbf{12:17}
  Gén 27,30-40}

\hypertarget{otra-referencia-a-la-soberanuxeda-del-nuevo-pacto-y-la-inminente-decisiuxf3n-final}{%
\subsection{Otra referencia a la soberanía del nuevo pacto y la
inminente decisión
final}\label{otra-referencia-a-la-soberanuxeda-del-nuevo-pacto-y-la-inminente-decisiuxf3n-final}}

\bibleverse{18} Porque no has venido a un monte que se puede tocar y que
arde con fuego, y a la negrura, a la oscuridad, a la tormenta,
\footnote{\textbf{12:18} Éxod 19,12; Éxod 19,16; Éxod 19,18; Deut 4,11}
\bibleverse{19} al sonido de una trompeta y a la voz de las palabras,
que los que lo oyeron rogaron que no se les dijera ni una palabra más,
\footnote{\textbf{12:19} Éxod 20,19} \bibleverse{20} porque no podían
soportar lo que se había ordenado: ``Si hasta un animal toca el monte,
será apedreado''. \bibleverse{21} Tan temible fue la aparición que
Moisés dijo: ``Estoy aterrado y temblando''.

\bibleverse{22} Pero tú has venido al monte Sión y a la ciudad del Dios
vivo, la Jerusalén celestial, y a innumerables multitudes de ángeles,
\footnote{\textbf{12:22} Gal 4,26; Efes 2,6; Fil 3,20; Apoc 5,11; Apoc
  21,2} \bibleverse{23} a la reunión festiva y a la asamblea de los
primogénitos que están inscritos en el cielo, a Dios el Juez de todos, a
los espíritus de los justos hechos perfectos, \footnote{\textbf{12:23}
  Luc 10,20} \bibleverse{24} a Jesús, el mediador de un nuevo pacto, y a
la sangre de la aspersión que habla mejor que la de Abel. \footnote{\textbf{12:24}
  Heb 9,15; Gén 4,10}

\hypertarget{la-gloria-del-fin-de-los-tiempos-aterradora-para-los-reacios-y-dichosa-para-los-obedientes}{%
\subsection{La gloria del fin de los tiempos, aterradora para los
reacios y dichosa para los
obedientes}\label{la-gloria-del-fin-de-los-tiempos-aterradora-para-los-reacios-y-dichosa-para-los-obedientes}}

\bibleverse{25} Procurad no rechazar al que habla. Porque si no
escaparon cuando rechazaron al que advertía en la tierra, cuánto más no
escaparemos los que nos apartamos del que advierte desde el cielo,
\footnote{\textbf{12:25} Heb 2,2; Heb 10,28-29} \bibleverse{26} cuya voz
hizo temblar la tierra entonces, pero que ahora ha prometido, diciendo:
``Todavía una vez más haré temblar no sólo la tierra, sino también los
cielos.'' \bibleverse{27} Esta frase, ``Todavía una vez más'', significa
la remoción de las cosas que son sacudidas, como de las cosas que han
sido hechas, para que las cosas que no son sacudidas puedan permanecer.
\bibleverse{28} Por lo tanto, recibiendo un Reino que no puede ser
sacudido, tengamos gracia, a través de la cual servimos a Dios
aceptablemente, con reverencia y temor, \bibleverse{29} porque nuestro
Dios es un fuego consumidor. \footnote{\textbf{12:29} Heb 10,31; Deut
  4,24}

\switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-remain-faithful-especially-with-regard-to-the-example-of-jesus}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to remain faithful, especially with regard to
the example of
Jesus}\label{exhortation-to-remain-faithful-especially-with-regard-to-the-example-of-jesus}}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{12}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore let's also, seeing we are surrounded by so
great a cloud of witnesses, lay aside every weight and the sin which so
easily entangles us, and let's run with perseverance the race that is
set before us, \bibleverse{2} looking to Jesus, the author and perfecter
of faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross,
despising its shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of
God. \bibleverse{3} For consider him who has endured such contradiction
of sinners against himself, that you don't grow weary, fainting in your
souls.

\hypertarget{reminder-to-allow-the-challenges-of-suffering-to-serve-as-a-means-to-promote-the-life-of-faith}{%
\subsection{Reminder to allow the challenges of suffering to serve as a
means to promote the life of
faith}\label{reminder-to-allow-the-challenges-of-suffering-to-serve-as-a-means-to-promote-the-life-of-faith}}

\bibleverse{4} You have not yet resisted to blood, striving against sin.
\bibleverse{5} You have forgotten the exhortation which reasons with you
as with children, ``My son, don't take lightly the chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when you are reproved by him; \bibleverse{6} for whom
the Lord loves, he disciplines, and chastises every son whom he
receives.''\footnote{\textbf{12:6} Proverbs 3:11-12} \bibleverse{7} It
is for discipline that you endure. God deals with you as with children,
for what son is there whom his father doesn't discipline? \bibleverse{8}
But if you are without discipline, of which all have been made
partakers, then you are illegitimate, and not children. \bibleverse{9}
Furthermore, we had the fathers of our flesh to chasten us, and we paid
them respect. Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
spirits and live? \bibleverse{10} For they indeed for a few days
disciplined us as seemed good to them, but he for our profit, that we
may be partakers of his holiness. \bibleverse{11} All chastening seems
for the present to be not joyous but grievous; yet afterward it yields
the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by
it.

\hypertarget{a-warning-to-the-community-to-stand-up-and-take-care-of-the-weak-and-vulnerable-members}{%
\subsection{A warning to the community to stand up and take care of the
weak and vulnerable
members}\label{a-warning-to-the-community-to-stand-up-and-take-care-of-the-weak-and-vulnerable-members}}

\bibleverse{12} Therefore lift up the hands that hang down and the
feeble knees, \footnote{\textbf{12:12} Isaiah 35:3} \bibleverse{13} and
make straight paths for your feet,\footnote{\textbf{12:13} Proverbs 4:26}
so what is lame may not be dislocated, but rather be healed.
\bibleverse{14} Follow after peace with all men, and the sanctification
without which no man will see the Lord, \bibleverse{15} looking
carefully lest there be any man who falls short of the grace of God,
lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you and many be defiled
by it, \bibleverse{16} lest there be any sexually immoral person or
profane person, like Esau, who sold his birthright for one meal.
\bibleverse{17} For you know that even when he afterward desired to
inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for a
change of mind though he sought it diligently with tears.

\hypertarget{another-reference-to-the-sovereignty-of-the-new-covenant-and-the-imminent-final-decision}{%
\subsection{Another reference to the sovereignty of the new covenant and
the imminent final
decision}\label{another-reference-to-the-sovereignty-of-the-new-covenant-and-the-imminent-final-decision}}

\bibleverse{18} For you have not come to a mountain that might be
touched and that burned with fire, and to blackness, darkness, storm,
\bibleverse{19} the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which
those who heard it begged that not one more word should be spoken to
them, \bibleverse{20} for they could not stand that which was commanded,
``If even an animal touches the mountain, it shall be
stoned''.\footnote{\textbf{12:20} TR adds ``or shot with an arrow''}
\footnote{\textbf{12:20} Exodus 19:12-13} \bibleverse{21} So fearful was
the appearance that Moses said, ``I am terrified and
trembling.''\footnote{\textbf{12:21} Deuteronomy 9:19} \bibleverse{22}
But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable multitudes of angels,
\bibleverse{23} to the festal gathering and assembly of the firstborn
who are enrolled in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of
just men made perfect, \bibleverse{24} to Jesus, the mediator of a new
covenant,\footnote{\textbf{12:24} Jeremiah 31:31} and to the blood of
sprinkling that speaks better than that of Abel.

\hypertarget{the-glory-of-the-end-times-terrifying-for-the-reluctant-and-blissful-for-the-obedient}{%
\subsection{The glory of the end times, terrifying for the reluctant and
blissful for the
obedient}\label{the-glory-of-the-end-times-terrifying-for-the-reluctant-and-blissful-for-the-obedient}}

\bibleverse{25} See that you don't refuse him who speaks. For if they
didn't escape when they refused him who warned on the earth, how much
more will we not escape who turn away from him who warns from heaven,
\bibleverse{26} whose voice shook the earth then, but now he has
promised, saying, ``Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but
also the heavens.''\footnote{\textbf{12:26} Haggai 2:6} \bibleverse{27}
This phrase, ``Yet once more'' signifies the removing of those things
that are shaken, as of things that have been made, that those things
which are not shaken may remain. \bibleverse{28} Therefore, receiving a
Kingdom that can't be shaken, let's have grace, through which we serve
God acceptably, with reverence and awe, \bibleverse{29} for our God is a
consuming fire.\footnote{\textbf{12:29} Deuteronomy 4:24}

\end{otherlanguage}

\switchcolumn[0]*

\hypertarget{advertencias-individuales-por-el-amor-fraterno-la-pureza-moral-y-la-promociuxf3n-de-la-vida-comunitaria}{%
\subsection{Advertencias individuales por el amor fraterno, la pureza
moral y la promoción de la vida
comunitaria}\label{advertencias-individuales-por-el-amor-fraterno-la-pureza-moral-y-la-promociuxf3n-de-la-vida-comunitaria}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{13}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Que continúe el amor fraternal. \footnote{\textbf{13:1}
  Juan 13,34; 2Pe 1,7} \bibleverse{2} No os olvidéis de dar hospitalidad
a los extraños, pues al hacerlo, algunos han hospedado a los ángeles sin
saberlo. \footnote{\textbf{13:2} Gén 18,3; Gén 19,2-3; Rom 12,13; 1Pe
  4,9; 3Jn 1,5-8} \bibleverse{3} Acuérdate de los presos, como si
estuvieras atado a ellos, y de los maltratados, ya que tú también estás
en el cuerpo. \footnote{\textbf{13:3} Mat 25,36} \bibleverse{4} Que el
matrimonio sea honrado entre todos, y que el lecho sea incontaminado;
pero Dios juzgará a los inmorales y a los adúlteros.

\bibleverse{5} Sed libres del amor al dinero, contentos con lo que
tenéis, porque él ha dicho: ``No os dejaré en absoluto, ni os
abandonaré''. \footnote{\textbf{13:5} 1Tim 6,6} \bibleverse{6} Para que
con buen ánimo digamos, ``El Señor es mi ayudante. No temeré. ¿Qué puede
hacerme el hombre?''

\hypertarget{amonestaciuxf3n-principal-de-ser-fieles-a-los-gobernantes-y-a-jesuxfas-el-que-permanece-en-la-eternidad-y-el-fin-del-servicio-del-sacrificio-por-el-pecado-juduxedo}{%
\subsection{Amonestación principal de ser fieles a los gobernantes y a
Jesús, el que permanece en la eternidad y el fin del servicio del
sacrificio por el pecado
judío}\label{amonestaciuxf3n-principal-de-ser-fieles-a-los-gobernantes-y-a-jesuxfas-el-que-permanece-en-la-eternidad-y-el-fin-del-servicio-del-sacrificio-por-el-pecado-juduxedo}}

\bibleverse{7} Recordad a vuestros líderes, hombres que os hablaron de
la palabra de Dios, y considerando los resultados de su conducta, imitad
su fe. \bibleverse{8} Jesucristo es el mismo ayer, hoy y siempre.
\footnote{\textbf{13:8} Is 41,4; Apoc 1,17-18; Apoc 22,13; 1Cor 3,11}
\bibleverse{9} No os dejéis llevar por enseñanzas diversas y extrañas,
pues es bueno que el corazón se establezca por la gracia, no por las
comidas, por las que no se beneficiaron los que se ocuparon de esa
manera. \footnote{\textbf{13:9} 2Cor 1,21; 1Tim 4,8; Rom 14,17; Efes
  4,14}

\bibleverse{10} Tenemos un altar del que no tienen derecho a comer los
que sirven al sagrado tabernáculo. \bibleverse{11} Porque los cuerpos de
esos animales, cuya sangre es introducida en el lugar santo por el sumo
sacerdote como ofrenda por el pecado, son quemados fuera del campamento.
\footnote{\textbf{13:11} Lev 7,6; Lev 16,27} \bibleverse{12} Por eso
también Jesús, para santificar al pueblo con su propia sangre, padeció
fuera de la puerta. \footnote{\textbf{13:12} Juan 19,17; Mat 21,39}
\bibleverse{13} Salgamos, pues, hacia él fuera del campamento, llevando
su vituperio. \footnote{\textbf{13:13} Heb 11,26; Heb 12,2}
\bibleverse{14} Porque no tenemos aquí una ciudad duradera, sino que
buscamos la que ha de venir. \footnote{\textbf{13:14} Heb 11,10; Heb
  12,22} \bibleverse{15} Por lo tanto, ofrezcamos continuamente a Dios
un sacrificio de alabanza, es decir, el fruto de los labios que
proclaman la fidelidad a su nombre. \footnote{\textbf{13:15} Os 14,2;
  Sal 50,14; Sal 50,23}

\hypertarget{advertencias-individuales-repetidas-especialmente-con-respecto-al-comportamiento-contra-los-luxedderes-comunitarios}{%
\subsection{Advertencias individuales repetidas, especialmente con
respecto al comportamiento contra los líderes
comunitarios}\label{advertencias-individuales-repetidas-especialmente-con-respecto-al-comportamiento-contra-los-luxedderes-comunitarios}}

\bibleverse{16} Pero no se olviden de hacer el bien y de compartir,
porque con tales sacrificios Dios se complace.

\bibleverse{17} Obedezcan a sus jefes y sométanse a ellos, pues velan
por sus almas, como quienes han de dar cuenta, para que lo hagan con
alegría y no con gemidos, pues eso sería inútil para ustedes.
\footnote{\textbf{13:17} 1Tes 5,12; Ezeq 3,17-19}

\bibleverse{18} Ruega por nosotros, pues estamos persuadidos de que
tenemos buena conciencia, deseando vivir honradamente en todo.
\footnote{\textbf{13:18} Rom 15,30; 2Cor 1,11-12} \bibleverse{19} Os
ruego encarecidamente que lo hagáis, para que yo me restablezca antes.

\hypertarget{clausura-de-la-carta-bendiciuxf3n-mensajes-personales-saludos}{%
\subsection{Clausura de la carta, bendición, mensajes personales,
saludos}\label{clausura-de-la-carta-bendiciuxf3n-mensajes-personales-saludos}}

\bibleverse{20} Que el Dios de la paz, que resucitó de entre los muertos
al gran pastor de las ovejas con la sangre de un pacto eterno, nuestro
Señor Jesús, \footnote{\textbf{13:20} Juan 10,12; 1Pe 2,25}
\bibleverse{21} os haga completos en toda obra buena para que hagáis su
voluntad, obrando en vosotros lo que es agradable a sus ojos, por
Jesucristo, a quien sea la gloria por los siglos de los siglos. Amén.

\bibleverse{22} Pero os exhorto, hermanos, a que soportéis la palabra de
exhortación, pues os he escrito con pocas palabras. \bibleverse{23}
Sabed que nuestro hermano Timoteo ha sido liberado, con el cual, si
viene pronto, os veré.

\bibleverse{24} Saludad a todos vuestros jefes y a todos los santos. Los
italianos te saludan.

\bibleverse{25} La gracia sea con todos vosotros. Amén. \switchcolumn
\begin{otherlanguage}{english}

\hypertarget{individual-warnings-for-fraternal-love-moral-purity-and-the-promotion-of-community-life}{%
\subsection{Individual warnings for fraternal love, moral purity and the
promotion of community
life}\label{individual-warnings-for-fraternal-love-moral-purity-and-the-promotion-of-community-life}}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{13}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} Let brotherly love continue. \bibleverse{2} Don't forget
to show hospitality to strangers, for in doing so, some have entertained
angels without knowing it. \bibleverse{3} Remember those who are in
bonds, as bound with them, and those who are ill-treated, since you are
also in the body. \bibleverse{4} Let marriage be held in honor among
all, and let the bed be undefiled; but God will judge the sexually
immoral and adulterers. \bibleverse{5} Be free from the love of money,
content with such things as you have, for he has said, ``I will in no
way leave you, neither will I in any way forsake you.''\footnote{\textbf{13:5}
  Deuteronomy 31:6} \bibleverse{6} So that with good courage we say,
``The Lord is my helper. I will not fear. What can man do to
me?''\footnote{\textbf{13:6} Psalm 118:6-7}

\hypertarget{main-admonition-to-be-faithful-to-the-rulers-and-to-jesus-the-one-who-remains-in-eternity-and-the-end-of-the-service-of-the-sacrifice-for-jewish-sin}{%
\subsection{Main admonition to be faithful to the rulers and to Jesus,
the one who remains in eternity and the end of the service of the
sacrifice for Jewish
sin}\label{main-admonition-to-be-faithful-to-the-rulers-and-to-jesus-the-one-who-remains-in-eternity-and-the-end-of-the-service-of-the-sacrifice-for-jewish-sin}}

\bibleverse{7} Remember your leaders, men who spoke to you the word of
God, and considering the results of their conduct, imitate their faith.
\bibleverse{8} Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.
\bibleverse{9} Don't be carried away by various and strange teachings,
for it is good that the heart be established by grace, not by foods,
through which those who were so occupied were not benefited.
\bibleverse{10} We have an altar from which those who serve the holy
tabernacle have no right to eat. \bibleverse{11} For the bodies of those
animals, whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priest
as an offering for sin, are burned outside of the camp.\footnote{\textbf{13:11}
  Leviticus 16:27} \bibleverse{12} Therefore Jesus also, that he might
sanctify the people through his own blood, suffered outside of the gate.
\bibleverse{13} Let's therefore go out to him outside of the camp,
bearing his reproach. \bibleverse{14} For we don't have here an enduring
city, but we seek that which is to come. \bibleverse{15} Through him,
then, let's offer up a sacrifice of praise to God \footnote{\textbf{13:15}
  Psalm 50:23} continually, that is, the fruit of lips which proclaim
allegiance to his name.

\hypertarget{repeated-individual-warnings-especially-regarding-behavior-against-community-leaders}{%
\subsection{Repeated individual warnings, especially regarding behavior
against community
leaders}\label{repeated-individual-warnings-especially-regarding-behavior-against-community-leaders}}

\bibleverse{16} But don't forget to be doing good and sharing, for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased. \bibleverse{17} Obey your leaders
and submit to them, for they watch on behalf of your souls, as those who
will give account, that they may do this with joy and not with groaning,
for that would be unprofitable for you. \bibleverse{18} Pray for us, for
we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, desiring to live
honorably in all things. \bibleverse{19} I strongly urge you to do this,
that I may be restored to you sooner.

\hypertarget{closing-of-the-letter-blessing-personal-messages-greetings}{%
\subsection{Closing of the letter, blessing, personal messages,
greetings}\label{closing-of-the-letter-blessing-personal-messages-greetings}}

\bibleverse{20} Now may the God of peace, who brought again from the
dead the great shepherd of the sheep with the blood of an eternal
covenant, our Lord Jesus, \bibleverse{21} make you complete in every
good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever.
Amen. \bibleverse{22} But I exhort you, brothers, endure the word of
exhortation, for I have written to you in few words. \bibleverse{23}
Know that our brother Timothy has been freed, with whom, if he comes
shortly, I will see you. \bibleverse{24} Greet all of your leaders and
all the saints. The Italians greet you. \bibleverse{25} Grace be with
you all. Amen. \end{otherlanguage} \end{paracol}
