\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} From Paul, now a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and from
Timothy, a fellow follower of the Lord. \bibverse{2} To our dear friend
and fellow worker Philemon, to our sister Apphia, to our fellow soldier
Archippus; and to the church that meets at Philemon's house;
\bibverse{3} may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you
and give you peace. \#\# Request regarding runaway slave

\bibverse{4} I always mention you in my prayers and thank God for you,
\bibverse{5} because I hear of the love and the faith which you show,
not only to the Lord Jesus, but also to all his people; \bibverse{6} and
I pray that your participation in the faith may result in action, as you
come to a fuller realization of everything that is good and Christlike
in us. \bibverse{7} I have indeed found great joy and encouragement in
your love, knowing, as I do, how the hearts of Christ's People have been
cheered, friend, by you.

\bibverse{8} And so, though my union with Christ enables me, with all
confidence, to dictate the course that you should adopt, \bibverse{9}
yet the claims of love make me prefer to plead with you --- yes, even
me, Paul, though I am an ambassador for Christ Jesus and, now a prisoner
for him as well. \bibverse{10} I plead with you for this child of mine,
Onesimus, to whom, in my prison, I have become a father. \bibverse{11}
Once he was of little service to you, but now he has become of great
service, not only to you, but to me as well; \bibverse{12} and I am
sending him back to you with this letter --- though it is like tearing
out of my heart. \bibverse{13} For my own sake I should like to keep him
with me, so that, while I am in prison for the good news, he might
attend to my wants on your behalf. \bibverse{14} But I do not wish to do
anything without your consent, because I want your generosity to be
voluntary and not, as it were, compulsory. \bibverse{15} It may be that
he was separated from you for an hour, for this reason, so that you
might have him back for ever, \bibverse{16} no longer as a slave, but as
something better --- a dearly loved friend and follower of the Lord,
especially dear to me, and how much more so to you, not only as a
person, but as your fellow Christian! \bibverse{17} If, then, you count
me your friend, receive him as you would me. \bibverse{18} If he has
caused you any loss, or owes you anything, charge it to me.
\bibverse{19} I, Paul, put my own hand to it --- I will repay you
myself. I say nothing about your owing me your self. \bibverse{20} Yes,
friend, let me gain something from you because of your union with the
Lord. Cheer my heart by your Christlike spirit. \bibverse{21} Even as I
write, I have such confidence in your compliance with my wishes, that I
am sure that you will do even more than I am asking. \bibverse{22}
Please also get a lodging ready for me, for I hope that I will be given
back to you all in answer to your prayers. \#\# Messages and Blessing

\bibverse{23} Epaphras, who is my fellow prisoner for Christ Jesus,
sends you his greeting; \bibverse{24} and Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas,
and Luke, my fellow workers, send theirs. \bibverse{25} May the blessing
of the Lord Jesus Christ rest on your souls.
