\hypertarget{preface}{%
\subsection{Preface}\label{preface}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} We write to you about the Word of life, which has been in
existence from the beginning. We write of what we have heard, of what we
have seen with our eyes, of what we watched reverently and touched with
our hands. \bibverse{2} That life was made visible, and we have seen it.
We bear our testimony to it, and tell you of that eternal life which was
with the Father and was made visible to us. \bibverse{3} It is of what
we have seen and heard that we now tell you, so that you may have
fellowship with us. And our fellowship is with the Father and with his
Son, Jesus Christ. \bibverse{4} We are writing all this to you that our
joy may be complete. \#\# Fellowship with God

\bibverse{5} This is the message which we have heard from him and
announce to you: God is light, and there is no darkness in him at all.
\bibverse{6} If we say that we have fellowship with him and yet continue
to walk in the darkness, our words and our lives are a lie. \bibverse{7}
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship
with one another, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, cleanses us from all
sin. \bibverse{8} If we say, ``we have no sin,'' then we are deceiving
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. \bibverse{9} If we confess our
sins, he is just and may be trusted to forgive our sins and cleanse us
from all wrongdoing. \bibverse{10} If we say that we haven't sinned, we
make God a liar, and his Word is not in us.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} My children, I am writing to you to keep you from sinning.
But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father --- Jesus
Christ, the righteous. \bibverse{2} He is the atoning sacrifice for our
sins, and not for ours only, but the sins of the whole world.
\bibverse{3} It is by keeping God's commands that we can be sure we know
him. \bibverse{4} Whoever says ``I know him,'' but does not keep his
commands, is a liar. The truth has no place in them. \bibverse{5} But
the person who keeps God's word, in them the love of God has indeed
reached its perfection. This is how we can be sure we are in him:
\bibverse{6} whoever claims to live in him should live just as Jesus
did. \#\# A new commandment

\bibverse{7} Dear friends, it is no new command that I am writing to
you, but an old command, which you have had from the beginning. That old
command is the message you have already heard. \bibverse{8} Yet, in a
way, it is a new command that I am writing to you --- which is shown
true in Christ's life and in yours --- for the darkness is passing away
and the true light is already shining. \bibverse{9} The person who says
that they are in the light, and yet hates others, is still in the
darkness. \bibverse{10} The person who loves others is always in the
light, and there is nothing within them to cause them to stumble.
\bibverse{11} The person who hates is in the dark. They stumble along in
the darkness; they do not know where they are going because the darkness
blinds them. \#\# Those who know God should not love the world
\bibverse{12} Little children, I am writing to you because your sins
have been forgiven for Christ's sake. \bibverse{13} Parents, I am
writing to you because you have come to know him who has been from the
beginning. Young people, I am writing to you because you have conquered
the evil one. Children, I write to you because you have come to know the
Father. \bibverse{14} Parents, I write to you because you have learnt to
know him who has been from the beginning. Young people, I write to you
because you are strong, and God's message is always in your hearts, and
you have conquered the evil one.

\bibverse{15} Do not love the world or what the world can offer. When
anyone loves the world, there is no love for the Father in them.
\bibverse{16} For all that the world can offer --- the desires for
physical pleasure, the enticements to the eye, the arrogance of wealth
--- belongs, not to the Father, but to the world. \bibverse{17} And the
world, and all that it gratifies, is passing away, but they who do God's
will remain for ever. \#\# Warnings against an antichrist

\bibverse{18} My children, it is the last hour. You were told that an
antichrist was coming; and many antichrists have already arisen. This is
why we know that this is the last hour. \bibverse{19} These people come
from our ranks, but they were never truly part of us --- if they had
been then they would have stayed with us. They left so it would be clear
that none of them really belonged to us. \bibverse{20} You, however,
have have been annointed by the Holy One. You all know the truth.
\bibverse{21} I am not writing to you because you do not know the truth,
but because you do know it, and because no lie can come from the truth.

\bibverse{22} Who is a liar, if not the one who denies that Jesus is the
Christ? That person is the antichrist --- one who rejects the Father and
the Son. \bibverse{23} No one who rejects the Son has the Father; to
acknowledge the Son is to have the Father also. \bibverse{24} As for
you, you must let what you have heard from the beginning continue to
live in you. If what you heard from the beginning dwells in you, you
will remain both in the Son and the Father. \bibverse{25} And this is
what he himself promised us --- eternal life!

\bibverse{26} In writing this to you, I have in mind those who are
trying to mislead you. \bibverse{27} As for you, the anointing which you
received from him remains with you. You do not need anyone to teach you.
His anointing teaches you about everything. What it teaches you is true,
it is not a lie. Do what it has taught you: abide in him. \bibverse{28}
Yes, my children, remain in him, so that when he appears our confidence
doesn't fail us, and we are not ashamed to meet him at his coming.
\bibverse{29} Since you know he is righteous, you realise that that
everyone who does what is right is his child.

\hypertarget{gods-children}{%
\subsection{God's Children}\label{gods-children}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} See what great love the Father has lavished on us: he lets
us be called God's children! For that is what we are. The reason why the
world does not know us is that it has not learnt to know him.
\bibverse{2} Dear friends, we are God's children now, and what we will
be has not yet been revealed. What we do know is that, when it is
revealed, we will be like him, because we will see him as he is.
\bibverse{3} And just as he is pure, everyone who has this hope, makes
and keeps themselves pure.

\bibverse{4} Everyone who lives sinfully is living in violation of God's
law. Sin is lawlessness. \bibverse{5} You know that Christ appeared to
take away our sins and that there is no sin in him. \bibverse{6} No one
who lives in him continues to sin; the sinner has not seen or known him.
\bibverse{7} My children, don't let anyone mislead you. The person who
does what is right is righteous, just as Christ is righteous.
\bibverse{8} The person who lives in sin is a child of the devil, for
the devil has been sinning from the beginning. To undo the devil's work
is the reason the Son of God appeared.

\bibverse{9} No child of God sins, because God's nature dwells in them.
They can't live in sin, because they are God's children. \bibverse{10}
By this it is made clear who are the children of God and who are the
devil's: anyone who doesn't do what is right or doesn't love others is
not a child of God. \bibverse{11} For this is the message we heard from
the beginning: we are to love one another. \bibverse{12} We must not be
like Cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. Why
did he kill him? Because his actions were evil, and his brother's were
righteous. \#\# Love each other

\bibverse{13} Do not be suprised, friends, if the world hates you.
\bibverse{14} We know that we have passed out of death into life,
because we love each other. The person who does not love remains in a
state of death. \bibverse{15} The person who hates another is a
murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life dwelling within
them.

\bibverse{16} This is how we know that love is: Christ gave his life for
us. So we should lay down our own lives for each other. \bibverse{17} If
anyone has material possessions, and and sees one of our own in need,
but closes their heart against that person, how can it be said that the
love of God is within them? \bibverse{18} My children, our love must not
be mere words or talk. It must be true and show itself in actions.

\bibverse{19} This is how we will know we belong to the truth and
reassure ourselves in God's presence: \bibverse{20} though our
conscience condemns us, God is greater than our conscience and knows
everything. \bibverse{21} Dear friends, if our conscience does not
condemn us, then we approach God with confidence, \bibverse{22} and we
receive from him whatever we ask, because we are keeping his commands,
and are doing what pleases him. \bibverse{23} His command is that we
should believe in his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another, as Christ
commanded us. \bibverse{24} The person who keeps his commands dwells in
God and God dwells in them. And we are sure he lives in us because of
the Spirit he has given us.

\hypertarget{true-and-false-inspiration}{%
\subsection{True and False
Inspiration}\label{true-and-false-inspiration}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} Dear friends, do not trust every spirit, but test the
spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets
have gone out into the world.

\bibverse{2} This is the way to recognise the Spirit of God: those who
acknowledge Jesus Christ as come in the flesh have God's Spirit,
\bibverse{3} while a spirit that doesn't acknowledge Jesus isn't from
God. Instead it is the spirit of the antichrist; you have heard that it
was coming, and it is now already in the world!

\bibverse{4} You, my children, come from God, and you have successfully
resisted such people as these, because he who is in you is greater than
the one who is in the world. \bibverse{5} Those people belong to the
world and therefore they speak as the world speaks, and the world
listens to them. \bibverse{6} We come from God. Whoever knows God
listens to us; the person who does not come from God does not listen to
us. This is how we distinguish the spirit of truth and the spirit of
deception. \#\# God is love

\bibverse{7} Dear friends, let us love one another, because love comes
from God and everyone who loves is a child of God and knows God.
\bibverse{8} Those who do not love know nothing of God, for God is love.
\bibverse{9} This is how God showed his love amongst us: he sent his one
and only Son into the world that we might live through him.
\bibverse{10} This is what love is: it is not that we have loved God,
but that he loved us and sent his Son to be an atoning sacrifice for our
sins.

\bibverse{11} Dear friends, since God loved us in this way, we should
love one another. \bibverse{12} No one has ever seen God, but if we love
one another, God lives in us and his love reaches perfection within us.
\bibverse{13} We know that we live in him, and he lives in us, because
he has given us a measure of his Spirit. \bibverse{14} Moreover, we have
seen for ourselves and testify that the Father has sent the Son to be
the Saviour of the world. \bibverse{15} Whoever acknowledges that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, God lives in them, and they live in God.
\bibverse{16} And so we have come to know and believe the love which God
has for us.

God is love; and whoever lives in love lives in God, and God lives in
them. \bibverse{17} This is the way love has reached its perfection
amongst us, so that we may have confidence on the day of judgement,
because in this world we are like Christ. \bibverse{18} There is no fear
in love; perfect love drives out fear because fear has to do with
punishment. So anyone who is afraid has not reached perfection in love.
\bibverse{19} We love, because God first loved us. \bibverse{20} If
someone says `I love God,' and yet hates others, they are a liar. For
the person who does not love their brother or sister, whom they have
seen, cannot love God, whom they have not seen. \bibverse{21} Indeed, we
have this command from Christ: Those who love God must also love each
other.

\hypertarget{faith-and-confidence}{%
\subsection{Faith and Confidence}\label{faith-and-confidence}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is a child
of God, and everyone who loves a parent loves his child. \bibverse{2} By
this we know that we love God's children --- when we love God and carry
out his commands. \bibverse{3} For to love God is to do what he commands
and his commands are not a burden, \bibverse{4} for whatever is born of
God overcomes the world. What is the victory by which the world is
overcome? Our faith! \bibverse{5} Who can overcome the world but the
person who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? \bibverse{6} Jesus
Christ, the one who came by water and blood --- not by water only but by
water and blood --- and the Spirit testifies to this because the Spirit
is truth. \bibverse{7} Indeed three testify: \bibverse{8} the Spirit,
the water, and the blood, and these three agree. \bibverse{9} We accept
human testimony, surely God's testimony is even stronger! And God's
testimony is the testimony he has given about his Son. \bibverse{10} The
person who believes in the Son of God has that testimony within them.
The person who does not believe God has made God a liar, by not
believing the testimony God has given about his Son. \bibverse{11} And
this is that testimony: God gave us eternal life, and this life is in
his Son. \bibverse{12} Whoever has the Son has life; whoever who doesn't
have God's Son does not have life. \#\# Final words

\bibverse{13} I have written these things to you who believe in the name
of God's Son, so that you may know that you have eternal life.
\bibverse{14} We can approach him with this confidence, that whenever we
ask anything that is in accordance with his will, he listens to us.
\bibverse{15} And if we know he hears us --- whatever we ask --- we know
also that what we ask for is ours. \bibverse{16} If anyone sees one of
our people committing some sin that is not a sin leading to death, they
should ask, and God will give them life. I refer to those whose sin does
not lead to death. There is a sin that leads to death. I am not saying
that you should pray about that. \bibverse{17} All wrongdoing is sin,
but there is sin that does not lead to death.

\bibverse{18} We know that those who have been born of God do not keep
sinning. God protects his children and the evil one cannot get hold of
them. \bibverse{19} We know that we are God's children, though the whole
world lies in the power of the evil one. \bibverse{20} We also know that
the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may
know the true God - and we are in him who is true, by being in his Son
Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life. \bibverse{21} My
children, guard yourselves against false ideas of God.
