\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel;
\bibverse{2} To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of
understanding; \bibverse{3} To receive the instruction of wisdom,
justice, and judgment, and equity;+ 1.3 equity: Heb. equities
\bibverse{4} To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge
and discretion.+ 1.4 discretion: or, advisement \bibverse{5} A wise man
will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall
attain unto wise counsels: \bibverse{6} To understand a proverb, and the
interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.+ 1.6 the
interpretation: or, an eloquent speech

\bibverse{7} ¶ The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge: but
fools despise wisdom and instruction.+ 1.7 the beginning: or, the
principal part \bibverse{8} My son, hear the instruction of thy father,
and forsake not the law of thy mother: \bibverse{9} For they shall be an
ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.+ 1.9
an\ldots: Heb. an adding

\bibverse{10} ¶ My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
\bibverse{11} If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let
us lurk privily for the innocent without cause: \bibverse{12} Let us
swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down
into the pit: \bibverse{13} We shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil: \bibverse{14} Cast in thy lot among
us; let us all have one purse: \bibverse{15} My son, walk not thou in
the way with them; refrain thy foot from their path: \bibverse{16} For
their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood. \bibverse{17}
Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.+ 1.17 in
the\ldots: Heb. in the eyes of every thing that hath a wing
\bibverse{18} And they lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privily
for their own lives. \bibverse{19} So are the ways of every one that is
greedy of gain; which taketh away the life of the owners thereof.

\bibverse{20} ¶ Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the
streets:+ 1.20 Wisdom: Heb. Wisdoms, that is, Excellent wisdom
\bibverse{21} She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the
openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying,
\bibverse{22} How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the
scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?
\bibverse{23} Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit
unto you, I will make known my words unto you.

\bibverse{24} ¶ Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded; \bibverse{25} But ye have set at
nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: \bibverse{26} I
also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh;
\bibverse{27} When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction
cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you.
\bibverse{28} Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: \bibverse{29} For that
they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD:
\bibverse{30} They would none of my counsel: they despised all my
reproof. \bibverse{31} Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their
own way, and be filled with their own devices. \bibverse{32} For the
turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools
shall destroy them.+ 1.32 turning\ldots: or, ease of the simple
\bibverse{33} But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall
be quiet from fear of evil.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my
commandments with thee; \bibverse{2} So that thou incline thine ear unto
wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding; \bibverse{3} Yea, if
thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding;+ 2.3 liftest\ldots: Heb. givest thy voice \bibverse{4} If
thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures;
\bibverse{5} Then shalt thou understand the fear of the LORD, and find
the knowledge of God. \bibverse{6} For the LORD giveth wisdom: out of
his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding. \bibverse{7} He layeth up
sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk
uprightly. \bibverse{8} He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth
the way of his saints. \bibverse{9} Then shalt thou understand
righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every good path.

\bibverse{10} ¶ When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is
pleasant unto thy soul; \bibverse{11} Discretion shall preserve thee,
understanding shall keep thee: \bibverse{12} To deliver thee from the
way of the evil man, from the man that speaketh froward things;
\bibverse{13} Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of
darkness; \bibverse{14} Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the
frowardness of the wicked; \bibverse{15} Whose ways are crooked, and
they froward in their paths: \bibverse{16} To deliver thee from the
strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with her words;
\bibverse{17} Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the
covenant of her God. \bibverse{18} For her house inclineth unto death,
and her paths unto the dead. \bibverse{19} None that go unto her return
again, neither take they hold of the paths of life. \bibverse{20} That
thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the
righteous. \bibverse{21} For the upright shall dwell in the land, and
the perfect shall remain in it. \bibverse{22} But the wicked shall be
cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of
it.+ 2.22 rooted: or, plucked up

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my
commandments: \bibverse{2} For length of days, and long life, and peace,
shall they add to thee.+ 3.2 long\ldots: Heb. years of life \bibverse{3}
Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck; write
them upon the table of thine heart: \bibverse{4} So shalt thou find
favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.+ 3.4
good\ldots: or, good success

\bibverse{5} ¶ Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto
thine own understanding. \bibverse{6} In all thy ways acknowledge him,
and he shall direct thy paths.

\bibverse{7} ¶ Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the LORD, and depart
from evil. \bibverse{8} It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to
thy bones.+ 3.8 health: Heb. medicine+ 3.8 marrow: Heb. watering, or,
moistening \bibverse{9} Honour the LORD with thy substance, and with the
firstfruits of all thine increase: \bibverse{10} So shall thy barns be
filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine.

\bibverse{11} ¶ My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD; neither
be weary of his correction: \bibverse{12} For whom the LORD loveth he
correcteth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.

\bibverse{13} ¶ Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that
getteth understanding.+ 3.13 that getteth\ldots: Heb. that draweth out
understanding \bibverse{14} For the merchandise of it is better than the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.
\bibverse{15} She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou
canst desire are not to be compared unto her. \bibverse{16} Length of
days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour.
\bibverse{17} Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. \bibverse{18} She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon
her: and happy is every one that retaineth her. \bibverse{19} The LORD
by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established
the heavens.+ 3.19 established: or, prepared \bibverse{20} By his
knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.

\bibverse{21} ¶ My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound
wisdom and discretion: \bibverse{22} So shall they be life unto thy
soul, and grace to thy neck. \bibverse{23} Then shalt thou walk in thy
way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. \bibverse{24} When thou
liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy
sleep shall be sweet. \bibverse{25} Be not afraid of sudden fear,
neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh. \bibverse{26}
For the LORD shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being
taken.

\bibverse{27} ¶ Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it
is in the power of thine hand to do it.+ 3.27 them\ldots: Heb. the
owners thereof \bibverse{28} Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come
again, and to morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee.
\bibverse{29} Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth
securely by thee.+ 3.29 Devise\ldots: or, Practise no evil

\bibverse{30} ¶ Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done
thee no harm.

\bibverse{31} ¶ Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his
ways.+ 3.31 the oppressor: Heb. a man of violence \bibverse{32} For the
froward is abomination to the LORD: but his secret is with the
righteous.

\bibverse{33} ¶ The curse of the LORD is in the house of the wicked: but
he blesseth the habitation of the just. \bibverse{34} Surely he scorneth
the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly. \bibverse{35} The wise
shall inherit glory: but shame shall be the promotion of fools.+ 3.35
shall be\ldots: Heb. exalteth the fools

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend
to know understanding. \bibverse{2} For I give you good doctrine,
forsake ye not my law. \bibverse{3} For I was my father's son, tender
and only beloved in the sight of my mother. \bibverse{4} He taught me
also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my
commandments, and live. \bibverse{5} Get wisdom, get understanding:
forget it not; neither decline from the words of my mouth. \bibverse{6}
Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall
keep thee. \bibverse{7} Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get
wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding. \bibverse{8} Exalt
her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honour, when
thou dost embrace her. \bibverse{9} She shall give to thine head an
ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.+ 4.9 a
crown\ldots: or, she shall compass thee with a crown of glory
\bibverse{10} Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of
thy life shall be many. \bibverse{11} I have taught thee in the way of
wisdom; I have led thee in right paths. \bibverse{12} When thou goest,
thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not
stumble. \bibverse{13} Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go:
keep her; for she is thy life.

\bibverse{14} ¶ Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the
way of evil men. \bibverse{15} Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it,
and pass away. \bibverse{16} For they sleep not, except they have done
mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.
\bibverse{17} For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine
of violence. \bibverse{18} But the path of the just is as the shining
light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. \bibverse{19}
The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they
stumble.

\bibverse{20} ¶ My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my
sayings. \bibverse{21} Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in
the midst of thine heart. \bibverse{22} For they are life unto those
that find them, and health to all their flesh.+ 4.22 health: Heb.
medicine

\bibverse{23} ¶ Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the
issues of life.+ 4.23 with\ldots: Heb. above all keeping \bibverse{24}
Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from
thee.+ 4.24 a froward\ldots: Heb. frowardness of mouth and perverseness
of lips \bibverse{25} Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine
eyelids look straight before thee. \bibverse{26} Ponder the path of thy
feet, and let all thy ways be established.+ 4.26 let\ldots: or, all thy
ways shall be ordered aright \bibverse{27} Turn not to the right hand
nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} My son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my
understanding: \bibverse{2} That thou mayest regard discretion, and that
thy lips may keep knowledge.

\bibverse{3} ¶ For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and
her mouth is smoother than oil:+ 5.3 mouth: Heb. palate \bibverse{4} But
her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a twoedged sword. \bibverse{5}
Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell. \bibverse{6}
Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, that
thou canst not know them. \bibverse{7} Hear me now therefore, O ye
children, and depart not from the words of my mouth. \bibverse{8} Remove
thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house:
\bibverse{9} Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto
the cruel: \bibverse{10} Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth; and
thy labours be in the house of a stranger;+ 5.10 thy wealth: Heb. thy
strength \bibverse{11} And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and
thy body are consumed, \bibverse{12} And say, How have I hated
instruction, and my heart despised reproof; \bibverse{13} And have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me! \bibverse{14} I was almost in all evil in the midst of
the congregation and assembly.

\bibverse{15} ¶ Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running
waters out of thine own well. \bibverse{16} Let thy fountains be
dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the streets. \bibverse{17} Let
them be only thine own, and not strangers' with thee. \bibverse{18} Let
thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.
\bibverse{19} Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times; and be thou ravished always with her
love.+ 5.19 satisfy\ldots: Heb. water thee+ 5.19 be thou\ldots: Heb. err
thou always in her love \bibverse{20} And why wilt thou, my son, be
ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?
\bibverse{21} For the ways of man are before the eyes of the LORD, and
he pondereth all his goings.

\bibverse{22} ¶ His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his sins.+ 5.22 sins: Heb. sin
\bibverse{23} He shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of
his folly he shall go astray.

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibverse{1} My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou hast
stricken thy hand with a stranger, \bibverse{2} Thou art snared with the
words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.
\bibverse{3} Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when thou art
come into the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and make sure thy
friend.+ 6.3 and make\ldots: or, so shalt thou prevail with thy friend
\bibverse{4} Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.
\bibverse{5} Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and
as a bird from the hand of the fowler.

\bibverse{6} ¶ Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be
wise: \bibverse{7} Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,
\bibverse{8} Provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in
the harvest. \bibverse{9} How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when
wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? \bibverse{10} Yet a little sleep, a
little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep: \bibverse{11} So
shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed
man.

\bibverse{12} ¶ A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward
mouth. \bibverse{13} He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his
feet, he teacheth with his fingers; \bibverse{14} Frowardness is in his
heart, he deviseth mischief continually; he soweth discord.+ 6.14
soweth: Heb. casteth forth \bibverse{15} Therefore shall his calamity
come suddenly; suddenly shall he be broken without remedy.

\bibverse{16} ¶ These six things doth the LORD hate: yea, seven are an
abomination unto him:+ 6.16 unto\ldots: Heb. of his soul \bibverse{17} A
proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,+ 6.17 A
proud\ldots: Heb. Haughty eyes \bibverse{18} An heart that deviseth
wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief,
\bibverse{19} A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth
discord among brethren.

\bibverse{20} ¶ My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not
the law of thy mother: \bibverse{21} Bind them continually upon thine
heart, and tie them about thy neck. \bibverse{22} When thou goest, it
shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and when thou
awakest, it shall talk with thee. \bibverse{23} For the commandment is a
lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of
life:+ 6.23 lamp: or, candle \bibverse{24} To keep thee from the evil
woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.+ 6.24 of
the\ldots: or, of the strange tongue \bibverse{25} Lust not after her
beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids.
\bibverse{26} For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a
piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.+
6.26 the adulteress: Heb. the woman of a man, or, a man's wife
\bibverse{27} Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be
burned? \bibverse{28} Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be
burned? \bibverse{29} So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife;
whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent. \bibverse{30} Men do not
despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry;
\bibverse{31} But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall
give all the substance of his house. \bibverse{32} But whoso committeth
adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth
his own soul.+ 6.32 understanding: Heb. heart \bibverse{33} A wound and
dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
\bibverse{34} For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not
spare in the day of vengeance. \bibverse{35} He will not regard any
ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.+
6.35 He will\ldots: Heb. He will not accept the face of any ransom

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibverse{1} My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with
thee. \bibverse{2} Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the
apple of thine eye. \bibverse{3} Bind them upon thy fingers, write them
upon the table of thine heart. \bibverse{4} Say unto wisdom, Thou art my
sister; and call understanding thy kinswoman: \bibverse{5} That they may
keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth
with her words.

\bibverse{6} ¶ For at the window of my house I looked through my
casement, \bibverse{7} And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned
among the youths, a young man void of understanding,+ 7.7 the youths:
Heb. the sons \bibverse{8} Passing through the street near her corner;
and he went the way to her house, \bibverse{9} In the twilight, in the
evening, in the black and dark night:+ 7.9 in the evening: Heb. in the
evening of days \bibverse{10} And, behold, there met him a woman with
the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart. \bibverse{11} (She is loud
and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house: \bibverse{12} Now is she
without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every corner.)
\bibverse{13} So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent
face said unto him,+ 7.13 with\ldots: Heb. she strengthened her face and
said \bibverse{14} I have peace offerings with me; this day have I payed
my vows.+ 7.14 I have\ldots: Heb. Peace offerings are upon me
\bibverse{15} Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek
thy face, and I have found thee. \bibverse{16} I have decked my bed with
coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt.
\bibverse{17} I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
\bibverse{18} Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let
us solace ourselves with loves. \bibverse{19} For the goodman is not at
home, he is gone a long journey: \bibverse{20} He hath taken a bag of
money with him, and will come home at the day appointed.+ 7.20
with\ldots: Heb. in his hand+ 7.20 the day\ldots: or, the new moon
\bibverse{21} With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with
the flattering of her lips she forced him. \bibverse{22} He goeth after
her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the
correction of the stocks;+ 7.22 straightway: Heb. suddenly \bibverse{23}
Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare,
and knoweth not that it is for his life.

\bibverse{24} ¶ Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend
to the words of my mouth. \bibverse{25} Let not thine heart decline to
her ways, go not astray in her paths. \bibverse{26} For she hath cast
down many wounded: yea, many strong men have been slain by her.
\bibverse{27} Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers
of death.

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibverse{1} Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?
\bibverse{2} She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the
places of the paths. \bibverse{3} She crieth at the gates, at the entry
of the city, at the coming in at the doors. \bibverse{4} Unto you, O
men, I call; and my voice is to the sons of man. \bibverse{5} O ye
simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding
heart. \bibverse{6} Hear; for I will speak of excellent things; and the
opening of my lips shall be right things. \bibverse{7} For my mouth
shall speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.+ 8.7
an\ldots: Heb. the abomination of my lips \bibverse{8} All the words of
my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in
them.+ 8.8 froward: Heb. wreathed \bibverse{9} They are all plain to him
that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. \bibverse{10}
Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice
gold. \bibverse{11} For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things
that may be desired are not to be compared to it.

\bibverse{12} I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of
witty inventions.+ 8.12 prudence: or, subtilty \bibverse{13} The fear of
the LORD is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and
the froward mouth, do I hate. \bibverse{14} Counsel is mine, and sound
wisdom: I am understanding; I have strength. \bibverse{15} By me kings
reign, and princes decree justice. \bibverse{16} By me princes rule, and
nobles, even all the judges of the earth. \bibverse{17} I love them that
love me; and those that seek me early shall find me. \bibverse{18}
Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness.
\bibverse{19} My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my
revenue than choice silver. \bibverse{20} I lead in the way of
righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment:+ 8.20 lead: or,
walk \bibverse{21} That I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance; and I will fill their treasures.

\bibverse{22} The LORD possessed me in the beginning of his way, before
his works of old. \bibverse{23} I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was. \bibverse{24} When there were no
depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with
water. \bibverse{25} Before the mountains were settled, before the hills
was I brought forth: \bibverse{26} While as yet he had not made the
earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.+
8.26 fields: or, open places+ 8.26 the highest\ldots: or, the chief part
\bibverse{27} When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a
compass upon the face of the depth:+ 8.27 a compass: or, a circle
\bibverse{28} When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened
the fountains of the deep: \bibverse{29} When he gave to the sea his
decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he
appointed the foundations of the earth: \bibverse{30} Then I was by him,
as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him; \bibverse{31} Rejoicing in the habitable part of his
earth; and my delights were with the sons of men.

\bibverse{32} Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for blessed
are they that keep my ways. \bibverse{33} Hear instruction, and be wise,
and refuse it not. \bibverse{34} Blessed is the man that heareth me,
watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
\bibverse{35} For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour
of the LORD.+ 8.35 obtain: Heb. bring forth \bibverse{36} But he that
sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love
death.

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibverse{1} Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven
pillars: \bibverse{2} She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her
wine; she hath also furnished her table.+ 9.2 her beasts: Heb. her
killing \bibverse{3} She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon
the highest places of the city, \bibverse{4} Whoso is simple, let him
turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,
\bibverse{5} Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have
mingled. \bibverse{6} Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way
of understanding. \bibverse{7} He that reproveth a scorner getteth to
himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot.
\bibverse{8} Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise
man, and he will love thee. \bibverse{9} Give instruction to a wise man,
and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will increase in
learning. \bibverse{10} The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom:
and the knowledge of the holy is understanding. \bibverse{11} For by me
thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be
increased. \bibverse{12} If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for
thyself: but if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.

\bibverse{13} ¶ A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth
nothing. \bibverse{14} For she sitteth at the door of her house, on a
seat in the high places of the city, \bibverse{15} To call passengers
who go right on their ways: \bibverse{16} Whoso is simple, let him turn
in hither: and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,
\bibverse{17} Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is
pleasant.+ 9.17 eaten\ldots: Heb. of secrecies \bibverse{18} But he
knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the
depths of hell.

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibverse{1} The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father:
but a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

\bibverse{2} Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness
delivereth from death. \bibverse{3} The LORD will not suffer the soul of
the righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the
wicked.+ 10.3 the substance\ldots: or, the wicked for their wickedness
\bibverse{4} He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the
hand of the diligent maketh rich. \bibverse{5} He that gathereth in
summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that
causeth shame. \bibverse{6} Blessings are upon the head of the just: but
violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. \bibverse{7} The memory of
the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot. \bibverse{8}
The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool shall
fall.+ 10.8 a prating\ldots: Heb. a fool of lips+ 10.8 fall: Heb. be
beaten \bibverse{9} He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he
that perverteth his ways shall be known. \bibverse{10} He that winketh
with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool shall fall.+ 10.10 fall:
Heb. be beaten \bibverse{11} The mouth of a righteous man is a well of
life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. \bibverse{12}
Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins. \bibverse{13} In
the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a rod is
for the back of him that is void of understanding.+ 10.13 of
understanding: Heb. of heart \bibverse{14} Wise men lay up knowledge:
but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction. \bibverse{15} The rich
man's wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the poor is their
poverty. \bibverse{16} The labour of the righteous tendeth to life: the
fruit of the wicked to sin. \bibverse{17} He is in the way of life that
keepeth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof erreth.+ 10.17 erreth:
or, causeth to err \bibverse{18} He that hideth hatred with lying lips,
and he that uttereth a slander, is a fool. \bibverse{19} In the
multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his
lips is wise.

\bibverse{20} The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of
the wicked is little worth. \bibverse{21} The lips of the righteous feed
many: but fools die for want of wisdom.+ 10.21 of wisdom: Heb. of heart
\bibverse{22} The blessing of the LORD, it maketh rich, and he addeth no
sorrow with it. \bibverse{23} It is as sport to a fool to do mischief:
but a man of understanding hath wisdom.

\bibverse{24} The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the
desire of the righteous shall be granted. \bibverse{25} As the whirlwind
passeth, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting
foundation. \bibverse{26} As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the
eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.

\bibverse{27} The fear of the LORD prolongeth days: but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened.+ 10.27 prolongeth: Heb. addeth \bibverse{28}
The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation of the
wicked shall perish.

\bibverse{29} The way of the LORD is strength to the upright: but
destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity. \bibverse{30} The
righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not inhabit the
earth.

\bibverse{31} The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the
froward tongue shall be cut out. \bibverse{32} The lips of the righteous
know what is acceptable: but the mouth of the wicked speaketh
frowardness.+ 10.32 frowardness: Heb. frowardnesses

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibverse{1} A false balance is abomination to the LORD: but a just
weight is his delight.+ 11.1 A false\ldots: Heb. Balances of deceit+
11.1 just\ldots: Heb. perfect stone \bibverse{2} When pride cometh, then
cometh shame: but with the lowly is wisdom. \bibverse{3} The integrity
of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of transgressors
shall destroy them. \bibverse{4} Riches profit not in the day of wrath:
but righteousness delivereth from death.

\bibverse{5} The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but
the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.+ 11.5 direct: Heb. rectify
\bibverse{6} The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but
transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness. \bibverse{7} When
a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust
men perisheth. \bibverse{8} The righteous is delivered out of trouble,
and the wicked cometh in his stead. \bibverse{9} An hypocrite with his
mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through knowledge shall the just be
delivered.

\bibverse{10} When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth:
and when the wicked perish, there is shouting. \bibverse{11} By the
blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is overthrown by the
mouth of the wicked.

\bibverse{12} He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a
man of understanding holdeth his peace.+ 11.12 void\ldots: Heb.
destitute of heart \bibverse{13} A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he
that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.+ 11.13 A talebearer:
Heb. He that walketh, being a talebearer \bibverse{14} Where no counsel
is, the people fall: but in the multitude of counsellors there is
safety. \bibverse{15} He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for
it: and he that hateth suretiship is sure.+ 11.15 smart: Heb. be sore
broken+ 11.15 suretiship: Heb. those that strike hands \bibverse{16} A
gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches.
\bibverse{17} The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but he that
is cruel troubleth his own flesh. \bibverse{18} The wicked worketh a
deceitful work: but to him that soweth righteousness shall be a sure
reward. \bibverse{19} As righteousness tendeth to life: so he that
pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death. \bibverse{20} They that are
of a froward heart are abomination to the LORD: but such as are upright
in their way are his delight. \bibverse{21} Though hand join in hand,
the wicked shall not be unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall
be delivered. \bibverse{22} As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is
a fair woman which is without discretion.+ 11.22 is without: Heb.
departeth from \bibverse{23} The desire of the righteous is only good:
but the expectation of the wicked is wrath. \bibverse{24} There is that
scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than
is meet, but it tendeth to poverty. \bibverse{25} The liberal soul shall
be made fat: and he that watereth shall be watered also himself.+ 11.25
liberal\ldots: Heb. soul of blessing \bibverse{26} He that withholdeth
corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of
him that selleth it. \bibverse{27} He that diligently seeketh good
procureth favour: but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.
\bibverse{28} He that trusteth in his riches shall fall: but the
righteous shall flourish as a branch. \bibverse{29} He that troubleth
his own house shall inherit the wind: and the fool shall be servant to
the wise of heart. \bibverse{30} The fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life; and he that winneth souls is wise.+ 11.30 winneth: Heb. taketh
\bibverse{31} Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth:
much more the wicked and the sinner.

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibverse{1} Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that
hateth reproof is brutish. \bibverse{2} A good man obtaineth favour of
the LORD: but a man of wicked devices will he condemn. \bibverse{3} A
man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the
righteous shall not be moved. \bibverse{4} A virtuous woman is a crown
to her husband: but she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his
bones. \bibverse{5} The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the
counsels of the wicked are deceit. \bibverse{6} The words of the wicked
are to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver
them. \bibverse{7} The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but the house
of the righteous shall stand. \bibverse{8} A man shall be commended
according to his wisdom: but he that is of a perverse heart shall be
despised.+ 12.8 of a\ldots: Heb. perverse of heart \bibverse{9} He that
is despised, and hath a servant, is better than he that honoureth
himself, and lacketh bread. \bibverse{10} A righteous man regardeth the
life of his beast: but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.+
12.10 tender\ldots: or, bowels \bibverse{11} He that tilleth his land
shall be satisfied with bread: but he that followeth vain persons is
void of understanding. \bibverse{12} The wicked desireth the net of evil
men: but the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit.+ 12.12 the net: or,
the fortress \bibverse{13} The wicked is snared by the transgression of
his lips: but the just shall come out of trouble.+ 12.13 The
wicked\ldots: Heb. The snare of the wicked is in the transgression of
lips \bibverse{14} A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of
his mouth: and the recompence of a man's hands shall be rendered unto
him. \bibverse{15} The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he
that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise. \bibverse{16} A fool's wrath is
presently known: but a prudent man covereth shame.+ 12.16 presently:
Heb. in that day \bibverse{17} He that speaketh truth sheweth forth
righteousness: but a false witness deceit. \bibverse{18} There is that
speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise is
health. \bibverse{19} The lip of truth shall be established for ever:
but a lying tongue is but for a moment. \bibverse{20} Deceit is in the
heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counsellors of peace is joy.
\bibverse{21} There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked
shall be filled with mischief. \bibverse{22} Lying lips are abomination
to the LORD: but they that deal truly are his delight. \bibverse{23} A
prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools proclaimeth
foolishness. \bibverse{24} The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but
the slothful shall be under tribute.+ 12.24 slothful: or, deceitful
\bibverse{25} Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good
word maketh it glad. \bibverse{26} The righteous is more excellent than
his neighbour: but the way of the wicked seduceth them.+ 12.26
excellent: or, abundant \bibverse{27} The slothful man roasteth not that
which he took in hunting: but the substance of a diligent man is
precious. \bibverse{28} In the way of righteousness is life; and in the
pathway thereof there is no death.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibverse{1} A wise son heareth his father's instruction: but a scorner
heareth not rebuke. \bibverse{2} A man shall eat good by the fruit of
his mouth: but the soul of the transgressors shall eat violence.
\bibverse{3} He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life: but he that
openeth wide his lips shall have destruction. \bibverse{4} The soul of
the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: but the soul of the diligent
shall be made fat. \bibverse{5} A righteous man hateth lying: but a
wicked man is loathsome, and cometh to shame. \bibverse{6} Righteousness
keepeth him that is upright in the way: but wickedness overthroweth the
sinner.+ 13.6 the sinner: Heb. sin \bibverse{7} There is that maketh
himself rich, yet hath nothing: there is that maketh himself poor, yet
hath great riches. \bibverse{8} The ransom of a man's life are his
riches: but the poor heareth not rebuke. \bibverse{9} The light of the
righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.+ 13.9
lamp: or, candle \bibverse{10} Only by pride cometh contention: but with
the well advised is wisdom. \bibverse{11} Wealth gotten by vanity shall
be diminished: but he that gathereth by labour shall increase.+ 13.11 by
labour: Heb. with the hand \bibverse{12} Hope deferred maketh the heart
sick: but when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life. \bibverse{13}
Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth the
commandment shall be rewarded.+ 13.13 shall be rewarded: or, shall be in
peace \bibverse{14} The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart
from the snares of death. \bibverse{15} Good understanding giveth
favour: but the way of transgressors is hard. \bibverse{16} Every
prudent man dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open his folly.+
13.16 layeth\ldots: Heb. spreadeth \bibverse{17} A wicked messenger
falleth into mischief: but a faithful ambassador is health.+ 13.17 a
faithful\ldots: Heb. an ambassador of faithfulness \bibverse{18} Poverty
and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction: but he that
regardeth reproof shall be honoured. \bibverse{19} The desire
accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is abomination to fools to
depart from evil. \bibverse{20} He that walketh with wise men shall be
wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.+ 13.20 destroyed:
Heb. broken \bibverse{21} Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous
good shall be repayed. \bibverse{22} A good man leaveth an inheritance
to his children's children: and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for
the just. \bibverse{23} Much food is in the tillage of the poor: but
there is that is destroyed for want of judgment. \bibverse{24} He that
spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him
betimes. \bibverse{25} The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his
soul: but the belly of the wicked shall want.

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibverse{1} Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish
plucketh it down with her hands. \bibverse{2} He that walketh in his
uprightness feareth the LORD: but he that is perverse in his ways
despiseth him. \bibverse{3} In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of
pride: but the lips of the wise shall preserve them. \bibverse{4} Where
no oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increase is by the strength of
the ox. \bibverse{5} A faithful witness will not lie: but a false
witness will utter lies. \bibverse{6} A scorner seeketh wisdom, and
findeth it not: but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth.
\bibverse{7} Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest
not in him the lips of knowledge. \bibverse{8} The wisdom of the prudent
is to understand his way: but the folly of fools is deceit. \bibverse{9}
Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous there is favour.
\bibverse{10} The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger doth
not intermeddle with his joy.+ 14.10 his own\ldots: Heb. the bitterness
of his soul \bibverse{11} The house of the wicked shall be overthrown:
but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish. \bibverse{12} There is
a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways
of death. \bibverse{13} Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the
end of that mirth is heaviness. \bibverse{14} The backslider in heart
shall be filled with his own ways: and a good man shall be satisfied
from himself. \bibverse{15} The simple believeth every word: but the
prudent man looketh well to his going. \bibverse{16} A wise man feareth,
and departeth from evil: but the fool rageth, and is confident.
\bibverse{17} He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of
wicked devices is hated. \bibverse{18} The simple inherit folly: but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge. \bibverse{19} The evil bow before
the good; and the wicked at the gates of the righteous. \bibverse{20}
The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but the rich hath many
friends.+ 14.20 the rich\ldots: Heb. many are the lovers of the rich
\bibverse{21} He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: but he that hath
mercy on the poor, happy is he. \bibverse{22} Do they not err that
devise evil? but mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good.
\bibverse{23} In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips
tendeth only to penury. \bibverse{24} The crown of the wise is their
riches: but the foolishness of fools is folly. \bibverse{25} A true
witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful witness speaketh lies.

\bibverse{26} In the fear of the LORD is strong confidence: and his
children shall have a place of refuge. \bibverse{27} The fear of the
LORD is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
\bibverse{28} In the multitude of people is the king's honour: but in
the want of people is the destruction of the prince. \bibverse{29} He
that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that is hasty of
spirit exalteth folly.+ 14.29 hasty\ldots: Heb. short of spirit
\bibverse{30} A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envy the
rottenness of the bones. \bibverse{31} He that oppresseth the poor
reproacheth his Maker: but he that honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.
\bibverse{32} The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the
righteous hath hope in his death. \bibverse{33} Wisdom resteth in the
heart of him that hath understanding: but that which is in the midst of
fools is made known. \bibverse{34} Righteousness exalteth a nation: but
sin is a reproach to any people.+ 14.34 to any\ldots: Heb. to nations
\bibverse{35} The king's favour is toward a wise servant: but his wrath
is against him that causeth shame.

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibverse{1} A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir
up anger. \bibverse{2} The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright:
but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness.+ 15.2 poureth: Heb.
belcheth, or, bubbleth \bibverse{3} The eyes of the LORD are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good. \bibverse{4} A wholesome tongue
is a tree of life: but perverseness therein is a breach in the spirit.+
15.4 A wholesome\ldots: Heb. The healing of the tongue \bibverse{5} A
fool despiseth his father's instruction: but he that regardeth reproof
is prudent. \bibverse{6} In the house of the righteous is much treasure:
but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble. \bibverse{7} The lips of
the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish doeth not so.
\bibverse{8} The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD:
but the prayer of the upright is his delight. \bibverse{9} The way of
the wicked is an abomination unto the LORD: but he loveth him that
followeth after righteousness. \bibverse{10} Correction is grievous unto
him that forsaketh the way: and he that hateth reproof shall die.+ 15.10
Correction: or, Instruction \bibverse{11} Hell and destruction are
before the LORD: how much more then the hearts of the children of men?
\bibverse{12} A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him: neither will
he go unto the wise. \bibverse{13} A merry heart maketh a cheerful
countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.
\bibverse{14} The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh
knowledge: but the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness. \bibverse{15}
All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry heart
hath a continual feast.

\bibverse{16} Better is little with the fear of the LORD than great
treasure and trouble therewith. \bibverse{17} Better is a dinner of
herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.
\bibverse{18} A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but he that is slow to
anger appeaseth strife. \bibverse{19} The way of the slothful man is as
an hedge of thorns: but the way of the righteous is made plain.+ 15.19
is made\ldots: Heb. is raised up as a causey \bibverse{20} A wise son
maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his mother.
\bibverse{21} Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man
of understanding walketh uprightly.+ 15.21 destitute\ldots: Heb. void of
heart \bibverse{22} Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in
the multitude of counsellors they are established. \bibverse{23} A man
hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due season,
how good is it!+ 15.23 due\ldots: Heb. his season \bibverse{24} The way
of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.
\bibverse{25} The LORD will destroy the house of the proud: but he will
establish the border of the widow. \bibverse{26} The thoughts of the
wicked are an abomination to the LORD: but the words of the pure are
pleasant words.+ 15.26 pleasant\ldots: Heb. words of pleasantness
\bibverse{27} He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he
that hateth gifts shall live. \bibverse{28} The heart of the righteous
studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.
\bibverse{29} The LORD is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer
of the righteous. \bibverse{30} The light of the eyes rejoiceth the
heart: and a good report maketh the bones fat. \bibverse{31} The ear
that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise. \bibverse{32}
He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth
reproof getteth understanding.+ 15.32 instruction: or, correction+ 15.32
heareth: or, obeyeth+ 15.32 getteth\ldots: Heb. possesseth an heart
\bibverse{33} The fear of the LORD is the instruction of wisdom; and
before honour is humility.

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibverse{1} The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the
tongue, is from the LORD.+ 16.1 preparations: or, disposings
\bibverse{2} All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the
LORD weigheth the spirits. \bibverse{3} Commit thy works unto the LORD,
and thy thoughts shall be established.+ 16.3 Commit: Heb. Roll
\bibverse{4} The LORD hath made all things for himself: yea, even the
wicked for the day of evil. \bibverse{5} Every one that is proud in
heart is an abomination to the LORD: though hand join in hand, he shall
not be unpunished.+ 16.5 unpunished: Heb. held innocent \bibverse{6} By
mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the LORD men
depart from evil. \bibverse{7} When a man's ways please the LORD, he
maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him. \bibverse{8} Better is
a little with righteousness than great revenues without right.
\bibverse{9} A man's heart deviseth his way: but the LORD directeth his
steps. \bibverse{10} A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his
mouth transgresseth not in judgment.+ 16.10 A divine\ldots: Heb.
Divination \bibverse{11} A just weight and balance are the LORD's: all
the weights of the bag are his work.+ 16.11 the weights: Heb. the stones
\bibverse{12} It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for
the throne is established by righteousness. \bibverse{13} Righteous lips
are the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right.

\bibverse{14} The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise
man will pacify it. \bibverse{15} In the light of the king's countenance
is life; and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain. \bibverse{16}
How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get understanding
rather to be chosen than silver! \bibverse{17} The highway of the
upright is to depart from evil: he that keepeth his way preserveth his
soul. \bibverse{18} Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty
spirit before a fall. \bibverse{19} Better it is to be of an humble
spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud.
\bibverse{20} He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: and
whoso trusteth in the LORD, happy is he.+ 16.20 handleth\ldots: or,
understandeth a matter \bibverse{21} The wise in heart shall be called
prudent: and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.
\bibverse{22} Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath
it: but the instruction of fools is folly. \bibverse{23} The heart of
the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips.+ 16.23
teacheth: Heb. maketh wise \bibverse{24} Pleasant words are as an
honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones. \bibverse{25}
There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are
the ways of death. \bibverse{26} He that laboureth laboureth for
himself; for his mouth craveth it of him.+ 16.26 He\ldots: Heb. The soul
of him that+ 16.26 craveth\ldots: Heb. boweth unto him

\bibverse{27} An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is
as a burning fire.+ 16.27 An\ldots: Heb. A man of Belial \bibverse{28} A
froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief friends.+
16.28 soweth: Heb. sendeth forth

\bibverse{29} A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into
the way that is not good. \bibverse{30} He shutteth his eyes to devise
froward things: moving his lips he bringeth evil to pass. \bibverse{31}
The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness. \bibverse{32} He that is slow to anger is better than the
mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.
\bibverse{33} The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing
thereof is of the LORD.

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibverse{1} Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an
house full of sacrifices with strife.+ 17.1 sacrifices: or, good cheer
\bibverse{2} A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth
shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.
\bibverse{3} The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but
the LORD trieth the hearts. \bibverse{4} A wicked doer giveth heed to
false lips; and a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue. \bibverse{5}
Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: and he that is glad at
calamities shall not be unpunished.+ 17.5 unpunished: Heb. held innocent
\bibverse{6} Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory
of children are their fathers. \bibverse{7} Excellent speech becometh
not a fool: much less do lying lips a prince.+ 17.7 Excellent\ldots:
Heb. A lip of excellency+ 17.7 lying\ldots: Heb. a lip of lying
\bibverse{8} A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath
it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.+ 17.8 a precious\ldots:
Heb. a stone of grace \bibverse{9} He that covereth a transgression
seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth very friends.+
17.9 seeketh: or, procureth \bibverse{10} A reproof entereth more into a
wise man than an hundred stripes into a fool.+ 17.10 entereth\ldots: or,
aweth more a wise man, than to strike a fool an hundred times
\bibverse{11} An evil man seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel
messenger shall be sent against him. \bibverse{12} Let a bear robbed of
her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly. \bibverse{13}
Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
\bibverse{14} The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water:
therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with. \bibverse{15}
He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even
they both are abomination to the LORD. \bibverse{16} Wherefore is there
a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to
it? \bibverse{17} A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born
for adversity. \bibverse{18} A man void of understanding striketh hands,
and becometh surety in the presence of his friend.+ 17.18 understanding:
Heb. heart \bibverse{19} He loveth transgression that loveth strife: and
he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction. \bibverse{20} He that
hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a perverse tongue
falleth into mischief.+ 17.20 He that hath a froward\ldots: Heb. The
froward of heart \bibverse{21} He that begetteth a fool doeth it to his
sorrow: and the father of a fool hath no joy. \bibverse{22} A merry
heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones.+
17.22 like: or, to \bibverse{23} A wicked man taketh a gift out of the
bosom to pervert the ways of judgment. \bibverse{24} Wisdom is before
him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of
the earth. \bibverse{25} A foolish son is a grief to his father, and
bitterness to her that bare him. \bibverse{26} Also to punish the just
is not good, nor to strike princes for equity.

\bibverse{27} He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of
understanding is of an excellent spirit.+ 17.27 an\ldots: or, a cool
\bibverse{28} Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise:
and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibverse{1} Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh and
intermeddleth with all wisdom.+ 18.1 Through\ldots: or, He that
separateth himself seeketh according to his desire, and intermeddleth in
every business \bibverse{2} A fool hath no delight in understanding, but
that his heart may discover itself. \bibverse{3} When the wicked cometh,
then cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach. \bibverse{4} The
words of a man's mouth are as deep waters, and the wellspring of wisdom
as a flowing brook. \bibverse{5} It is not good to accept the person of
the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment.

\bibverse{6} A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth
for strokes. \bibverse{7} A fool's mouth is his destruction, and his
lips are the snare of his soul. \bibverse{8} The words of a talebearer
are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.+
18.8 talebearer: or, whisperer+ 18.8 as wounds: or, like as when men are
wounded+ 18.8 innermost\ldots: Heb. chambers \bibverse{9} He also that
is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster.
\bibverse{10} The name of the LORD is a strong tower: the righteous
runneth into it, and is safe.+ 18.10 safe: Heb. set aloft \bibverse{11}
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as an high wall in his own
conceit. \bibverse{12} Before destruction the heart of man is haughty,
and before honour is humility. \bibverse{13} He that answereth a matter
before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto him.+ 18.13
answereth\ldots: Heb. returneth a word \bibverse{14} The spirit of a man
will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?
\bibverse{15} The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of
the wise seeketh knowledge. \bibverse{16} A man's gift maketh room for
him, and bringeth him before great men. \bibverse{17} He that is first
in his own cause seemeth just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth
him. \bibverse{18} The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth
between the mighty. \bibverse{19} A brother offended is harder to be won
than a strong city: and their contentions are like the bars of a castle.
\bibverse{20} A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his
mouth; and with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.
\bibverse{21} Death and life are in the power of the tongue: and they
that love it shall eat the fruit thereof. \bibverse{22} Whoso findeth a
wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour of the LORD.
\bibverse{23} The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly.
\bibverse{24} A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and
there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibverse{1} Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he
that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool. \bibverse{2} Also, that the
soul be without knowledge, it is not good; and he that hasteth with his
feet sinneth. \bibverse{3} The foolishness of man perverteth his way:
and his heart fretteth against the LORD. \bibverse{4} Wealth maketh many
friends; but the poor is separated from his neighbour. \bibverse{5} A
false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shall
not escape.+ 19.5 unpunished: Heb. held innocent

\bibverse{6} Many will intreat the favour of the prince: and every man
is a friend to him that giveth gifts.+ 19.6 him\ldots: Heb. a man of
gifts \bibverse{7} All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much
more do his friends go far from him? he pursueth them with words, yet
they are wanting to him. \bibverse{8} He that getteth wisdom loveth his
own soul: he that keepeth understanding shall find good.+ 19.8 wisdom:
Heb. an heart \bibverse{9} A false witness shall not be unpunished, and
he that speaketh lies shall perish. \bibverse{10} Delight is not seemly
for a fool; much less for a servant to have rule over princes.
\bibverse{11} The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and it is his
glory to pass over a transgression.+ 19.11 discretion: or, prudence
\bibverse{12} The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his
favour is as dew upon the grass. \bibverse{13} A foolish son is the
calamity of his father: and the contentions of a wife are a continual
dropping. \bibverse{14} House and riches are the inheritance of fathers:
and a prudent wife is from the LORD. \bibverse{15} Slothfulness casteth
into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall suffer hunger. \bibverse{16}
He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; but he that
despiseth his ways shall die. \bibverse{17} He that hath pity upon the
poor lendeth unto the LORD; and that which he hath given will he pay him
again.+ 19.17 that which\ldots: or, his deed \bibverse{18} Chasten thy
son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.+
19.18 for\ldots: or, to his destruction: or, to cause him to die
\bibverse{19} A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou
deliver him, yet thou must do it again.+ 19.19 do: Heb. add
\bibverse{20} Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be
wise in thy latter end. \bibverse{21} There are many devices in a man's
heart; nevertheless the counsel of the LORD, that shall stand.
\bibverse{22} The desire of a man is his kindness: and a poor man is
better than a liar. \bibverse{23} The fear of the LORD tendeth to life:
and he that hath it shall abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with
evil. \bibverse{24} A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and
will not so much as bring it to his mouth again. \bibverse{25} Smite a
scorner, and the simple will beware: and reprove one that hath
understanding, and he will understand knowledge.+ 19.25 will beware:
Heb. will be cunning \bibverse{26} He that wasteth his father, and
chaseth away his mother, is a son that causeth shame, and bringeth
reproach. \bibverse{27} Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that
causeth to err from the words of knowledge. \bibverse{28} An ungodly
witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked devoureth
iniquity.+ 19.28 An\ldots: Heb. A witness of Belial \bibverse{29}
Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibverse{1} Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise. \bibverse{2} The fear of a king is as the
roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh him to anger sinneth against his own
soul. \bibverse{3} It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but
every fool will be meddling. \bibverse{4} The sluggard will not plow by
reason of the cold; therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have
nothing.+ 20.4 cold: or, winter \bibverse{5} Counsel in the heart of man
is like deep water; but a man of understanding will draw it out.
\bibverse{6} Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a
faithful man who can find?+ 20.6 goodness: or, bounty \bibverse{7} The
just man walketh in his integrity: his children are blessed after him.
\bibverse{8} A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth
away all evil with his eyes. \bibverse{9} Who can say, I have made my
heart clean, I am pure from my sin? \bibverse{10} Divers weights, and
divers measures, both of them are alike abomination to the LORD.+ 20.10
Divers weights: Heb. A stone and a stone+ 20.10 divers measures: Heb. an
ephah and an ephah \bibverse{11} Even a child is known by his doings,
whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. \bibverse{12} The
hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the LORD hath made even both of them.
\bibverse{13} Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine
eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread. \bibverse{14} It is
naught, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone his way, then
he boasteth. \bibverse{15} There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but
the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel. \bibverse{16} Take his
garment that is surety for a stranger: and take a pledge of him for a
strange woman. \bibverse{17} Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but
afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.+ 20.17 deceit: Heb.
lying, or, falsehood \bibverse{18} Every purpose is established by
counsel: and with good advice make war. \bibverse{19} He that goeth
about as a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore meddle not with him
that flattereth with his lips.+ 20.19 flattereth: or, enticeth
\bibverse{20} Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be
put out in obscure darkness.+ 20.20 lamp: or, candle \bibverse{21} An
inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end thereof
shall not be blessed. \bibverse{22} Say not thou, I will recompense
evil; but wait on the LORD, and he shall save thee. \bibverse{23} Divers
weights are an abomination unto the LORD; and a false balance is not
good.+ 20.23 a false\ldots: Heb. balance of deceit \bibverse{24} Man's
goings are of the LORD; how can a man then understand his own way?
\bibverse{25} It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy,
and after vows to make enquiry. \bibverse{26} A wise king scattereth the
wicked, and bringeth the wheel over them. \bibverse{27} The spirit of
man is the candle of the LORD, searching all the inward parts of the
belly.+ 20.27 candle: or, lamp \bibverse{28} Mercy and truth preserve
the king: and his throne is upholden by mercy. \bibverse{29} The glory
of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old men is the gray
head. \bibverse{30} The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do
stripes the inward parts of the belly.+ 20.30 cleanseth\ldots: Heb. is a
purging medicine against

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibverse{1} The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers
of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will. \bibverse{2} Every way of
a man is right in his own eyes: but the LORD pondereth the hearts.
\bibverse{3} To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the LORD
than sacrifice. \bibverse{4} An high look, and a proud heart, and the
plowing of the wicked, is sin.+ 21.4 An\ldots: Heb. Haughtiness of eyes+
21.4 the plowing: or, the light \bibverse{5} The thoughts of the
diligent tend only to plenteousness; but of every one that is hasty only
to want. \bibverse{6} The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a
vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. \bibverse{7} The
robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse to do
judgment.+ 21.7 destroy\ldots: Heb. saw them, or, dwell with them
\bibverse{8} The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure,
his work is right. \bibverse{9} It is better to dwell in a corner of the
housetop, than with a brawling woman in a wide house.+ 21.9 a
brawling\ldots: Heb. a woman of contentions+ 21.9 a wide\ldots: Heb. an
house of society \bibverse{10} The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his
neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes.+ 21.10 findeth\ldots: Heb. is
not favoured \bibverse{11} When the scorner is punished, the simple is
made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.
\bibverse{12} The righteous man wisely considereth the house of the
wicked: but God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.
\bibverse{13} Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also
shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. \bibverse{14} A gift in
secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom strong wrath.
\bibverse{15} It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction
shall be to the workers of iniquity. \bibverse{16} The man that
wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the
congregation of the dead. \bibverse{17} He that loveth pleasure shall be
a poor man: he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.+ 21.17
pleasure: or, sport \bibverse{18} The wicked shall be a ransom for the
righteous, and the transgressor for the upright. \bibverse{19} It is
better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry
woman.+ 21.19 in\ldots: Heb. in the land of the desert \bibverse{20}
There is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the wise; but
a foolish man spendeth it up. \bibverse{21} He that followeth after
righteousness and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honour.
\bibverse{22} A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth
down the strength of the confidence thereof. \bibverse{23} Whoso keepeth
his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles. \bibverse{24}
Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath.+
21.24 in proud\ldots: Heb. in the wrath of pride

\bibverse{25} The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands
refuse to labour. \bibverse{26} He coveteth greedily all the day long:
but the righteous giveth and spareth not. \bibverse{27} The sacrifice of
the wicked is abomination: how much more, when he bringeth it with a
wicked mind?+ 21.27 with\ldots: Heb. in wickedness? \bibverse{28} A
false witness shall perish: but the man that heareth speaketh
constantly.+ 21.28 A\ldots: Heb. A witness of lies \bibverse{29} A
wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the upright, he directeth his
way.+ 21.29 directeth: or, considereth

\bibverse{30} There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against
the LORD. \bibverse{31} The horse is prepared against the day of battle:
but safety is of the LORD.+ 21.31 safety: or, victory

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibverse{1} A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and
loving favour rather than silver and gold.+ 22.1 loving\ldots: or,
favour is better than, etc \bibverse{2} The rich and poor meet together:
the LORD is the maker of them all. \bibverse{3} A prudent man foreseeth
the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished.
\bibverse{4} By humility and the fear of the LORD are riches, and
honour, and life.+ 22.4 By\ldots: or, The reward of humility, etc
\bibverse{5} Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that
doth keep his soul shall be far from them. \bibverse{6} Train up a child
in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from
it.+ 22.6 Train\ldots: or, Catechise+ 22.6 in\ldots: Heb. in his way
\bibverse{7} The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant
to the lender.+ 22.7 the lender: Heb. the man that lendeth \bibverse{8}
He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: and the rod of his anger
shall fail.+ 22.8 the rod\ldots: or, with the rod of his anger he shall
be consumed \bibverse{9} He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed;
for he giveth of his bread to the poor.+ 22.9 He that\ldots: Heb. Good
of eye \bibverse{10} Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out;
yea, strife and reproach shall cease. \bibverse{11} He that loveth
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the king shall be his
friend.+ 22.11 for\ldots: or, and hath grace in his lips \bibverse{12}
The eyes of the LORD preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the words
of the transgressor.+ 22.12 the words: or, the matters \bibverse{13} The
slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shall be slain in the
streets. \bibverse{14} The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that
is abhorred of the LORD shall fall therein. \bibverse{15} Foolishness is
bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of correction shall drive it
far from him. \bibverse{16} He that oppresseth the poor to increase his
riches, and he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want.

\bibverse{17} Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and
apply thine heart unto my knowledge. \bibverse{18} For it is a pleasant
thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy
lips.+ 22.18 within\ldots: Heb. in thy belly \bibverse{19} That thy
trust may be in the LORD, I have made known to thee this day, even to
thee.+ 22.19 even\ldots: or, trust thou also \bibverse{20} Have not I
written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge,
\bibverse{21} That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of
truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send
unto thee?+ 22.21 to them\ldots: or, to those that send thee?

\bibverse{22} Rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the
afflicted in the gate: \bibverse{23} For the LORD will plead their
cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.

\bibverse{24} Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious
man thou shalt not go: \bibverse{25} Lest thou learn his ways, and get a
snare to thy soul.

\bibverse{26} Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that
are sureties for debts. \bibverse{27} If thou hast nothing to pay, why
should he take away thy bed from under thee? \bibverse{28} Remove not
the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.+ 22.28 landmark: or,
bound \bibverse{29} Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall
stand before kings; he shall not stand before mean men.+ 22.29
mean\ldots: Heb. obscure men

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibverse{1} When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently
what is before thee: \bibverse{2} And put a knife to thy throat, if thou
be a man given to appetite. \bibverse{3} Be not desirous of his
dainties: for they are deceitful meat.

\bibverse{4} Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom.
\bibverse{5} Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches
certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward
heaven.+ 23.5 set\ldots: Heb. cause thine eyes to fly upon

\bibverse{6} Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye,
neither desire thou his dainty meats: \bibverse{7} For as he thinketh in
his heart, so is he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart is
not with thee. \bibverse{8} The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou
vomit up, and lose thy sweet words. \bibverse{9} Speak not in the ears
of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.

\bibverse{10} Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields
of the fatherless:+ 23.10 landmark: or, bound \bibverse{11} For their
redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee.

\bibverse{12} Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the
words of knowledge. \bibverse{13} Withhold not correction from the
child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die.
\bibverse{14} Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his
soul from hell. \bibverse{15} My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart
shall rejoice, even mine.+ 23.15 even\ldots: or, even I will rejoice
\bibverse{16} Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right
things.

\bibverse{17} Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear
of the LORD all the day long. \bibverse{18} For surely there is an end;
and thine expectation shall not be cut off.+ 23.18 end: or, reward

\bibverse{19} Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in
the way. \bibverse{20} Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of
flesh:+ 23.20 of flesh: Heb. of their flesh \bibverse{21} For the
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness shall
clothe a man with rags. \bibverse{22} Hearken unto thy father that begat
thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old. \bibverse{23} Buy the
truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.
\bibverse{24} The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he
that begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him. \bibverse{25} Thy
father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall
rejoice. \bibverse{26} My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes
observe my ways. \bibverse{27} For a whore is a deep ditch; and a
strange woman is a narrow pit. \bibverse{28} She also lieth in wait as
for a prey, and increaseth the transgressors among men.+ 23.28 as
for\ldots: or, as a robber

\bibverse{29} Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who
hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?
\bibverse{30} They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek
mixed wine. \bibverse{31} Look not thou upon the wine when it is red,
when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.
\bibverse{32} At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
adder.+ 23.32 an\ldots: or, a cockatrice \bibverse{33} Thine eyes shall
behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things.
\bibverse{34} Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of
the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.+ 23.34 the
midst\ldots: Heb. the heart of the sea \bibverse{35} They have stricken
me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt
it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.+ 23.35 I
felt\ldots: Heb. I knew it not

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibverse{1} Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be
with them. \bibverse{2} For their heart studieth destruction, and their
lips talk of mischief.

\bibverse{3} Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it
is established: \bibverse{4} And by knowledge shall the chambers be
filled with all precious and pleasant riches. \bibverse{5} A wise man is
strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength.+ 24.5 is strong:
Heb. is in strength+ 24.5 increaseth\ldots: Heb. strengtheneth might
\bibverse{6} For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in
multitude of counsellors there is safety.

\bibverse{7} Wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in
the gate. \bibverse{8} He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a
mischievous person. \bibverse{9} The thought of foolishness is sin: and
the scorner is an abomination to men. \bibverse{10} If thou faint in the
day of adversity, thy strength is small.+ 24.10 small: Heb. narrow

\bibverse{11} If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death,
and those that are ready to be slain; \bibverse{12} If thou sayest,
Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider
it? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and shall not he
render to every man according to his works?

\bibverse{13} My son, eat thou honey, because it is good; and the
honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste:+ 24.13 to\ldots: Heb. upon thy
palate \bibverse{14} So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul:
when thou hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy
expectation shall not be cut off.

\bibverse{15} Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the
righteous; spoil not his resting place: \bibverse{16} For a just man
falleth seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into
mischief.

\bibverse{17} Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine
heart be glad when he stumbleth: \bibverse{18} Lest the LORD see it, and
it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.+ 24.18 it
displease\ldots: Heb. it be evil in his eyes

\bibverse{19} Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou
envious at the wicked;+ 24.19 Fret\ldots: or, Keep not company with the
wicked \bibverse{20} For there shall be no reward to the evil man; the
candle of the wicked shall be put out.+ 24.20 candle: or, lamp

\bibverse{21} My son, fear thou the LORD and the king: and meddle not
with them that are given to change:+ 24.21 them\ldots: Heb. changers
\bibverse{22} For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth
the ruin of them both?

\bibverse{23} These things also belong to the wise. It is not good to
have respect of persons in judgment. \bibverse{24} He that saith unto
the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the people curse, nations
shall abhor him: \bibverse{25} But to them that rebuke him shall be
delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.+ 24.25 a good\ldots:
Heb. a blessing of good \bibverse{26} Every man shall kiss his lips that
giveth a right answer.+ 24.26 that\ldots: Heb. that answereth right
words \bibverse{27} Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for
thyself in the field; and afterwards build thine house.

\bibverse{28} Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and
deceive not with thy lips. \bibverse{29} Say not, I will do so to him as
he hath done to me: I will render to the man according to his work.

\bibverse{30} I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard
of the man void of understanding; \bibverse{31} And, lo, it was all
grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and
the stone wall thereof was broken down. \bibverse{32} Then I saw, and
considered it well: I looked upon it, and received instruction.+ 24.32
considered\ldots: Heb. set my heart \bibverse{33} Yet a little sleep, a
little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep: \bibverse{34} So
shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth; and thy want as an armed
man.+ 24.34 an\ldots: Heb. a man of shield

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibverse{1} These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of
Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.

\bibverse{2} It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour
of kings is to search out a matter. \bibverse{3} The heaven for height,
and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable.+ 25.3
is\ldots: Heb. there is no searching

\bibverse{4} Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come
forth a vessel for the finer. \bibverse{5} Take away the wicked from
before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.

\bibverse{6} Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and
stand not in the place of great men:+ 25.6 Put\ldots: Heb. Set not out
thy glory \bibverse{7} For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come
up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the
prince whom thine eyes have seen.

\bibverse{8} Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to
do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.
\bibverse{9} Debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover
not a secret to another:+ 25.9 a secret\ldots: or, the secret of
\bibverse{10} Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame, and thine
infamy turn not away.

\bibverse{11} A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver.+ 25.11 fitly\ldots: Heb. spoken upon his wheels \bibverse{12} As
an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover
upon an obedient ear. \bibverse{13} As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, so is a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he
refresheth the soul of his masters. \bibverse{14} Whoso boasteth himself
of a false gift is like clouds and wind without rain.+ 25.14 of a\ldots:
Heb. in a gift of falsehood \bibverse{15} By long forbearing is a prince
persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone. \bibverse{16} Hast thou
found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled
therewith, and vomit it. \bibverse{17} Withdraw thy foot from thy
neighbour's house; lest he be weary of thee, and so hate thee.+ 25.17
Withdraw\ldots: or, Let thy foot be seldom in+ 25.17 weary\ldots: Heb.
full of thee \bibverse{18} A man that beareth false witness against his
neighbour is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow. \bibverse{19}
Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken
tooth, and a foot out of joint. \bibverse{20} As he that taketh away a
garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so is he that
singeth songs to an heavy heart.

\bibverse{21} If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he
be thirsty, give him water to drink: \bibverse{22} For thou shalt heap
coals of fire upon his head, and the LORD shall reward thee.
\bibverse{23} The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry
countenance a backbiting tongue.+ 25.23 driveth\ldots: or, bringeth
forth rain: so doth a backbiting tongue an angry countenance
\bibverse{24} It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than
with a brawling woman and in a wide house. \bibverse{25} As cold waters
to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country. \bibverse{26} A
righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled fountain,
and a corrupt spring. \bibverse{27} It is not good to eat much honey: so
for men to search their own glory is not glory. \bibverse{28} He that
hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down, and
without walls.

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibverse{1} As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not
seemly for a fool. \bibverse{2} As the bird by wandering, as the swallow
by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come. \bibverse{3} A whip
for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fool's back.

\bibverse{4} Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be
like unto him. \bibverse{5} Answer a fool according to his folly, lest
he be wise in his own conceit.+ 26.5 conceit: Heb. eyes

\bibverse{6} He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off
the feet, and drinketh damage.+ 26.6 damage: or, violence \bibverse{7}
The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth of
fools.+ 26.7 are\ldots: Heb. are lifted up \bibverse{8} As he that
bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honour to a fool.+ 26.8
bindeth\ldots: or, putteth a precious stone in an heap of stones
\bibverse{9} As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a
parable in the mouth of fools. \bibverse{10} The great God that formed
all things both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors.+ 26.10
The great\ldots: or, A great man grieveth all, and he hireth the fool,
he hireth also transgressors \bibverse{11} As a dog returneth to his
vomit, so a fool returneth to his folly.+ 26.11 returneth to his folly:
Heb. iterateth his folly \bibverse{12} Seest thou a man wise in his own
conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him. \bibverse{13} The
slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the
streets. \bibverse{14} As the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth the
slothful upon his bed. \bibverse{15} The slothful hideth his hand in his
bosom; it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth.+ 26.15 it
grieveth\ldots: or, he is weary \bibverse{16} The sluggard is wiser in
his own conceit than seven men that can render a reason. \bibverse{17}
He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is
like one that taketh a dog by the ears.+ 26.17 meddleth: or, is enraged

\bibverse{18} As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,+
26.18 firebrands: Heb. flames, or, sparks \bibverse{19} So is the man
that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport?

\bibverse{20} Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there
is no talebearer, the strife ceaseth.+ 26.20 Where no\ldots: Heb.
Without wood+ 26.20 talebearer: or, whisperer+ 26.20 ceaseth: Heb. is
silent \bibverse{21} As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so
is a contentious man to kindle strife. \bibverse{22} The words of a
talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of
the belly.+ 26.22 innermost\ldots: Heb. chambers \bibverse{23} Burning
lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with silver dross.

\bibverse{24} He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up
deceit within him;+ 26.24 dissembleth: or, is known \bibverse{25} When
he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there are seven abominations in
his heart.+ 26.25 speaketh\ldots: Heb. maketh his voice gracious
\bibverse{26} Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be
shewed before the whole congregation.+ 26.26 by\ldots: or, in secret
\bibverse{27} Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that
rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. \bibverse{28} A lying tongue
hateth those that are afflicted by it; and a flattering mouth worketh
ruin.

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibverse{1} Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a
day may bring forth.+ 27.1 to\ldots: Heb. to morrow day \bibverse{2} Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not
thine own lips.

\bibverse{3} A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool's wrath
is heavier than them both.+ 27.3 heavy: Heb. heaviness \bibverse{4}
Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before
envy?+ 27.4 Wrath\ldots: Heb. Wrath is cruelty, and anger an
overflowing+ 27.4 envy: or, jealousy?

\bibverse{5} Open rebuke is better than secret love. \bibverse{6}
Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are
deceitful.+ 27.6 deceitful: or, earnest, or, frequent \bibverse{7} The
full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet.+ 27.7 loatheth: Heb. treadeth under foot \bibverse{8} As
a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his
place.

\bibverse{9} Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the
sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.+ 27.9 by\ldots: Heb. from
the counsel of the soul \bibverse{10} Thine own friend, and thy father's
friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother's house in the day of
thy calamity: for better is a neighbour that is near than a brother far
off. \bibverse{11} My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may
answer him that reproacheth me. \bibverse{12} A prudent man foreseeth
the evil, and hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.
\bibverse{13} Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a
pledge of him for a strange woman. \bibverse{14} He that blesseth his
friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be
counted a curse to him.

\bibverse{15} A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious
woman are alike. \bibverse{16} Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and
the ointment of his right hand, which bewrayeth itself. \bibverse{17}
Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.
\bibverse{18} Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so
he that waiteth on his master shall be honoured. \bibverse{19} As in
water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man. \bibverse{20}
Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are never
satisfied.+ 27.20 never: Heb. not \bibverse{21} As the fining pot for
silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a man to his praise.
\bibverse{22} Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat
with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

\bibverse{23} Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look
well to thy herds.+ 27.23 look\ldots: Heb. set thy heart \bibverse{24}
For riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every
generation?+ 27.24 riches: Heb. strength+ 27.24 to\ldots: Heb. to
generation and generation? \bibverse{25} The hay appeareth, and the
tender grass sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered.
\bibverse{26} The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the
price of the field. \bibverse{27} And thou shalt have goats' milk enough
for thy food, for the food of thy household, and for the maintenance for
thy maidens.+ 27.27 maintenance: Heb. life

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibverse{1} The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are
bold as a lion. \bibverse{2} For the transgression of a land many are
the princes thereof: but by a man of understanding and knowledge the
state thereof shall be prolonged.+ 28.2 by\ldots: or, by men of
understanding and wisdom shall they likewise be prolonged \bibverse{3} A
poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which leaveth
no food.+ 28.3 which\ldots: Heb. without food \bibverse{4} They that
forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the law contend with
them. \bibverse{5} Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek
the LORD understand all things. \bibverse{6} Better is the poor that
walketh in his uprightness, than he that is perverse in his ways, though
he be rich. \bibverse{7} Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he
that is a companion of riotous men shameth his father.+ 28.7 is a
companion\ldots: or, feedeth gluttons \bibverse{8} He that by usury and
unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that
will pity the poor.+ 28.8 unjust\ldots: Heb. by increase \bibverse{9} He
that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abomination. \bibverse{10} Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in
an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright
shall have good things in possession. \bibverse{11} The rich man is wise
in his own conceit; but the poor that hath understanding searcheth him
out.+ 28.11 own\ldots: Heb. eyes \bibverse{12} When righteous men do
rejoice, there is great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man is
hidden.+ 28.12 hidden: or, sought for \bibverse{13} He that covereth his
sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall
have mercy. \bibverse{14} Happy is the man that feareth alway: but he
that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief. \bibverse{15} As a
roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people. \bibverse{16} The prince that wanteth understanding is also a
great oppressor: but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days.
\bibverse{17} A man that doeth violence to the blood of any person shall
flee to the pit; let no man stay him. \bibverse{18} Whoso walketh
uprightly shall be saved: but he that is perverse in his ways shall fall
at once. \bibverse{19} He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of
bread: but he that followeth after vain persons shall have poverty
enough. \bibverse{20} A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he
that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.+ 28.20 innocent: or,
unpunished \bibverse{21} To have respect of persons is not good: for for
a piece of bread that man will transgress. \bibverse{22} He that hasteth
to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not that poverty shall come
upon him.+ 28.22 hasteth\ldots: or, hath and evil eye hasteth to be rich
\bibverse{23} He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour
than he that flattereth with the tongue. \bibverse{24} Whoso robbeth his
father or his mother, and saith, It is no transgression; the same is the
companion of a destroyer.+ 28.24 a destroyer: Heb. a man destroying
\bibverse{25} He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he
that putteth his trust in the LORD shall be made fat. \bibverse{26} He
that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh wisely, he
shall be delivered. \bibverse{27} He that giveth unto the poor shall not
lack: but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse. \bibverse{28}
When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the
righteous increase.

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{29}\label{section-28}}

\bibverse{1} He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.+ 29.1 He\ldots: Heb. A
man of reproofs \bibverse{2} When the righteous are in authority, the
people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn. +
29.2 in\ldots: or, increased \bibverse{3} Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth
his father: but he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth his
substance. \bibverse{4} The king by judgment establisheth the land: but
he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it.+ 29.4 he\ldots: Heb. a man of
oblations \bibverse{5} A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a
net for his feet. \bibverse{6} In the transgression of an evil man there
is a snare: but the righteous doth sing and rejoice. \bibverse{7} The
righteous considereth the cause of the poor: but the wicked regardeth
not to know it. \bibverse{8} Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but
wise men turn away wrath.+ 29.8 bring\ldots: or, set a city on fire
\bibverse{9} If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he
rage or laugh, there is no rest. \bibverse{10} The bloodthirsty hate the
upright: but the just seek his soul.+ 29.10 The bloodthirsty: Heb. Men
of blood \bibverse{11} A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise man
keepeth it in till afterwards. \bibverse{12} If a ruler hearken to lies,
all his servants are wicked. \bibverse{13} The poor and the deceitful
man meet together: the LORD lighteneth both their eyes.+ 29.13 the
deceitful\ldots: or, the usurer \bibverse{14} The king that faithfully
judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.
\bibverse{15} The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to
himself bringeth his mother to shame. \bibverse{16} When the wicked are
multiplied, transgression increaseth: but the righteous shall see their
fall. \bibverse{17} Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea,
he shall give delight unto thy soul. \bibverse{18} Where there is no
vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy is he.+
29.18 perish: or, is made naked \bibverse{19} A servant will not be
corrected by words: for though he understand he will not answer.
\bibverse{20} Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more
hope of a fool than of him.+ 29.20 words: or, matters? \bibverse{21} He
that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall have him
become his son at the length. \bibverse{22} An angry man stirreth up
strife, and a furious man aboundeth in transgression. \bibverse{23} A
man's pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the humble in
spirit. \bibverse{24} Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul:
he heareth cursing, and bewrayeth it not. \bibverse{25} The fear of man
bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the LORD shall be
safe.+ 29.25 safe: Heb. set on high \bibverse{26} Many seek the ruler's
favour; but every man's judgment cometh from the LORD.+ 29.26 the
ruler's\ldots: Heb. the face of a ruler \bibverse{27} An unjust man is
an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the way is
abomination to the wicked.

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{30}\label{section-29}}

\bibverse{1} The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the
man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal, \bibverse{2} Surely I
am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man.
\bibverse{3} I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the
holy.+ 30.3 have: Heb. know \bibverse{4} Who hath ascended up into
heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath
bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the
earth? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?
\bibverse{5} Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that
put their trust in him.+ 30.5 pure: Heb. purified \bibverse{6} Add thou
not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

\bibverse{7} Two things have I required of thee; deny me them not before
I die:+ 30.7 deny\ldots: Heb. withhold not from me \bibverse{8} Remove
far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me
with food convenient for me:+ 30.8 convenient\ldots: Heb. of my
allowance \bibverse{9} Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is
the LORD? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain.+ 30.9 deny\ldots: Heb. belie thee

\bibverse{10} Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee,
and thou be found guilty.+ 30.10 Accuse\ldots: Heb. Hurt not with thy
tongue \bibverse{11} There is a generation that curseth their father,
and doth not bless their mother. \bibverse{12} There is a generation
that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness. \bibverse{13} There is a generation, O how lofty are their
eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. \bibverse{14} There is a
generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth as knives, to
devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.

\bibverse{15} The horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give.
There are three things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say
not, It is enough:+ 30.15 It is\ldots: Heb. Wealth \bibverse{16} The
grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not filled with water; and
the fire that saith not, It is enough. \bibverse{17} The eye that
mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of
the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.+ 30.17
the valley: or, the brook

\bibverse{18} There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea,
four which I know not: \bibverse{19} The way of an eagle in the air; the
way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea;
and the way of a man with a maid.+ 30.19 midst: Heb. heart \bibverse{20}
Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her
mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness. \bibverse{21} For three
things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it cannot bear:
\bibverse{22} For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he is
filled with meat; \bibverse{23} For an odious woman when she is married;
and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress.

\bibverse{24} There be four things which are little upon the earth, but
they are exceeding wise:+ 30.24 exceeding\ldots: Heb. wise, made wise
\bibverse{25} The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their
meat in the summer; \bibverse{26} The conies are but a feeble folk, yet
make they their houses in the rocks; \bibverse{27} The locusts have no
king, yet go they forth all of them by bands;+ 30.27 by\ldots: Heb.
gathered together \bibverse{28} The spider taketh hold with her hands,
and is in kings' palaces.

\bibverse{29} There be three things which go well, yea, four are comely
in going: \bibverse{30} A lion which is strongest among beasts, and
turneth not away for any; \bibverse{31} A greyhound; an he goat also;
and a king, against whom there is no rising up.+ 30.31 greyhound: or,
horse: Heb. girt in the loins \bibverse{32} If thou hast done foolishly
in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon
thy mouth. \bibverse{33} Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth
butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the
forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{31}\label{section-30}}

\bibverse{1} The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother
taught him. \bibverse{2} What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and
what, the son of my vows? \bibverse{3} Give not thy strength unto women,
nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings. \bibverse{4} It is not for
kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine; nor for princes
strong drink: \bibverse{5} Lest they drink, and forget the law, and
pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.+ 31.5 pervert: Heb. alter+
31.5 of any\ldots: Heb. of all the sons of affliction \bibverse{6} Give
strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that
be of heavy hearts.+ 31.6 of\ldots: Heb. bitter of soul \bibverse{7} Let
him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.
\bibverse{8} Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction.+ 31.8 such\ldots: Heb. the sons of destruction
\bibverse{9} Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of
the poor and needy.

\bibverse{10} ¶ Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far
above rubies. \bibverse{11} The heart of her husband doth safely trust
in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil. \bibverse{12} She will
do him good and not evil all the days of her life. \bibverse{13} She
seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.
\bibverse{14} She is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her food
from afar. \bibverse{15} She riseth also while it is yet night, and
giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens.
\bibverse{16} She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of
her hands she planteth a vineyard.+ 31.16 buyeth: Heb. taketh
\bibverse{17} She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her
arms. \bibverse{18} She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her
candle goeth not out by night.+ 31.18 She\ldots: Heb. She tasteth
\bibverse{19} She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold
the distaff. \bibverse{20} She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea,
she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.+ 31.20 She\ldots: Heb. She
spreadeth \bibverse{21} She is not afraid of the snow for her household:
for all her household are clothed with scarlet.+ 31.21 scarlet: or,
double garments \bibverse{22} She maketh herself coverings of tapestry;
her clothing is silk and purple. \bibverse{23} Her husband is known in
the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land. \bibverse{24}
She maketh fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles unto the
merchant. \bibverse{25} Strength and honour are her clothing; and she
shall rejoice in time to come. \bibverse{26} She openeth her mouth with
wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of kindness. \bibverse{27} She
looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of
idleness. \bibverse{28} Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her
husband also, and he praiseth her. \bibverse{29} Many daughters have
done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.+ 31.29 have\ldots: or,
have gotten riches \bibverse{30} Favour is deceitful, and beauty is
vain: but a woman that feareth the LORD, she shall be praised.
\bibverse{31} Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works
praise her in the gates.
