\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa,
which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and
in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years
before the earthquake. \bibverse{2} And he said, The LORD will roar from
Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the habitations of the
shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither.

\bibverse{3} Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Damascus,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:+ 1.3 and\ldots:
or, yea, for four+ 1.3 turn\ldots: or, convert it, or, let it be quiet
\bibverse{4} But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which
shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad. \bibverse{5} I will break also
the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven,
and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house of Eden: and the people
of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, saith the LORD.+ 1.5 the
plain\ldots: or, Bikathaven+ 1.5 the house\ldots: or, Beth-eden

\bibverse{6} ¶ Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Gaza,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
carried away captive the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom:+
1.6 away captive\ldots: or, them away with an entire \bibverse{7} But I
will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces
thereof: \bibverse{8} And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and
him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will turn mine hand
against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, saith
the Lord GOD.

\bibverse{9} ¶ Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Tyrus,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the
brotherly covenant:+ 1.9 the brotherly\ldots: Heb. the covenant of
brethren \bibverse{10} But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus,
which shall devour the palaces thereof.

\bibverse{11} ¶ Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Edom,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he
did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and
his anger did tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath for ever:+ 1.11
did cast\ldots: Heb. corrupted his compassions \bibverse{12} But I will
send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

\bibverse{13} ¶ Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of the
children of Ammon, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof; because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead,
that they might enlarge their border:+ 1.13 ripped\ldots: or, divided
the mountains \bibverse{14} But I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the
day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind: \bibverse{15}
And their king shall go into captivity, he and his princes together,
saith the LORD.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Moab, and
for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he burned
the bones of the king of Edom into lime: \bibverse{2} But I will send a
fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth: and Moab
shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet:
\bibverse{3} And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and
will slay all the princes thereof with him, saith the LORD.

\bibverse{4} ¶ Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Judah,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
have despised the law of the LORD, and have not kept his commandments,
and their lies caused them to err, after the which their fathers have
walked: \bibverse{5} But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall
devour the palaces of Jerusalem.

\bibverse{6} ¶ Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Israel,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes;
\bibverse{7} That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the
poor, and turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will
go in unto the same maid, to profane my holy name:+ 2.7 maid: or, young
woman \bibverse{8} And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to
pledge by every altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the
house of their god.+ 2.8 the condemned: or, such as have fined, or,
mulcted

\bibverse{9} ¶ Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was
like the height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet I
destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.
\bibverse{10} Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you
forty years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.
\bibverse{11} And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your
young men for Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel?
saith the LORD. \bibverse{12} But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink;
and commanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not. \bibverse{13} Behold,
I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves.+
2.13 I am\ldots: or, I will press your place, as a cart full of sheaves
presseth \bibverse{14} Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift,
and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty
deliver himself:+ 2.14 himself: Heb. his soul, or, life \bibverse{15}
Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and he that is swift of
foot shall not deliver himself: neither shall he that rideth the horse
deliver himself. \bibverse{16} And he that is courageous among the
mighty shall flee away naked in that day, saith the LORD.+ 2.16
courageous: Heb. strong of his heart

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} Hear this word that the LORD hath spoken against you, O
children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the
land of Egypt, saying, \bibverse{2} You only have I known of all the
families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities.+ 3.2 punish: Heb. visit upon \bibverse{3} Can two walk
together, except they be agreed? \bibverse{4} Will a lion roar in the
forest, when he hath no prey? will a young lion cry out of his den, if
he have taken nothing?+ 3.4 cry: Heb. give forth his voice \bibverse{5}
Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him?
shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?
\bibverse{6} Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be
afraid? shall there be evil in a city, and the LORD hath not done it?+
3.6 be afraid: or, run together?+ 3.6 the LORD\ldots: or, shall not the
LORD do somewhat? \bibverse{7} Surely the Lord GOD will do nothing, but
he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets. \bibverse{8} The
lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord GOD hath spoken, who can
but prophesy?

\bibverse{9} ¶ Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in
the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of
Samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the
oppressed in the midst thereof.+ 3.9 oppressed: or, oppressions
\bibverse{10} For they know not to do right, saith the LORD, who store
up violence and robbery in their palaces.+ 3.10 robbery: or, spoil
\bibverse{11} Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; An adversary there
shall be even round about the land; and he shall bring down thy strength
from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled. \bibverse{12} Thus saith
the LORD; As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs,
or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be taken out that
dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.+
3.12 taketh: Heb. delivereth+ 3.12 in Damascus\ldots: or, on the bed's
feet \bibverse{13} Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the
Lord GOD, the God of hosts, \bibverse{14} That in the day that I shall
visit the transgressions of Israel upon him I will also visit the altars
of Beth-el: and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground.+ 3.14 visit: or, punish Israel for \bibverse{15} And I will
smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of ivory
shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, saith the LORD.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain
of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to
their masters, Bring, and let us drink. \bibverse{2} The Lord GOD hath
sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that he
will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.
\bibverse{3} And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that
which is before her; and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith the
LORD.+ 4.3 cast\ldots: or, cast away the things of the palace

\bibverse{4} ¶ Come to Beth-el, and transgress; at Gilgal multiply
transgression; and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes
after three years:+ 4.4 three\ldots: Heb. three years of days
\bibverse{5} And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and
proclaim and publish the free offerings: for this liketh you, O ye
children of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.+ 4.5 offer: Heb. offer by
burning+ 4.5 this\ldots: Heb. so ye love

\bibverse{6} ¶ And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your
cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not returned
unto me, saith the LORD. \bibverse{7} And also I have withholden the
rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest: and I
caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another
city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not
withered. \bibverse{8} So two or three cities wandered unto one city, to
drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto
me, saith the LORD. \bibverse{9} I have smitten you with blasting and
mildew: when your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and your
olive trees increased, the palmerworm devoured them: yet have ye not
returned unto me, saith the LORD.+ 4.9 when\ldots: or, the multitude of
your gardens, etc. did the palmerworm \bibverse{10} I have sent among
you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I
slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses; and I have made
the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not
returned unto me, saith the LORD.+ 4.10 after\ldots: or, in the way+
4.10 and have\ldots: Heb. with the captivity of your horses
\bibverse{11} I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet
have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. \bibverse{12} Therefore
thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this unto
thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. \bibverse{13} For, lo, he that
formeth the mountains, and createth the wind, and declareth unto man
what is his thought, that maketh the morning darkness, and treadeth upon
the high places of the earth, The LORD, The God of hosts, is his name.+
4.13 wind: or, spirit

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a
lamentation, O house of Israel. \bibverse{2} The virgin of Israel is
fallen; she shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; there is
none to raise her up. \bibverse{3} For thus saith the Lord GOD; The city
that went out by a thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went
forth by an hundred shall leave ten, to the house of Israel.

\bibverse{4} ¶ For thus saith the LORD unto the house of Israel, Seek ye
me, and ye shall live: \bibverse{5} But seek not Beth-el, nor enter into
Gilgal, and pass not to Beer-sheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into
captivity, and Beth-el shall come to nought. \bibverse{6} Seek the LORD,
and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph,
and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Beth-el. \bibverse{7}
Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the
earth, \bibverse{8} Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and
turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark
with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out
upon the face of the earth: The LORD is his name: \bibverse{9} That
strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled shall
come against the fortress.+ 5.9 spoiled: Heb. spoil \bibverse{10} They
hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh
uprightly. \bibverse{11} Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon
the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of
hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant
vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.+ 5.11 pleasant\ldots:
Heb. vineyards of desire \bibverse{12} For I know your manifold
transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a
bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their right.+ 5.12
a bribe: or, a ransom \bibverse{13} Therefore the prudent shall keep
silence in that time; for it is an evil time. \bibverse{14} Seek good,
and not evil, that ye may live: and so the LORD, the God of hosts, shall
be with you, as ye have spoken. \bibverse{15} Hate the evil, and love
the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the LORD
God of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.

\bibverse{16} Therefore the LORD, the God of hosts, the Lord, saith
thus; Wailing shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the
highways, Alas! alas! and they shall call the husbandman to mourning,
and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing. \bibverse{17} And in
all vineyards shall be wailing: for I will pass through thee, saith the
LORD. \bibverse{18} Woe unto you that desire the day of the LORD! to
what end is it for you? the day of the LORD is darkness, and not light.
\bibverse{19} As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or
went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit
him. \bibverse{20} Shall not the day of the LORD be darkness, and not
light? even very dark, and no brightness in it?

\bibverse{21} ¶ I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell
in your solemn assemblies.+ 5.21 in\ldots: or, your holy days
\bibverse{22} Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat
offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace
offerings of your fat beasts.+ 5.22 peace\ldots: or, thank offerings
\bibverse{23} Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will
not hear the melody of thy viols. \bibverse{24} But let judgment run
down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.+ 5.24 run: Heb.
roll \bibverse{25} Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in
the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? \bibverse{26} But ye have
borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of
your god, which ye made to yourselves.+ 5.26 the tabernacle\ldots: or,
Siccuth your king \bibverse{27} Therefore will I cause you to go into
captivity beyond Damascus, saith the LORD, whose name is The God of
hosts.

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibverse{1} Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the
mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the
house of Israel came!+ 6.1 are at\ldots: or, are secure+ 6.1 chief: or,
firstfruits \bibverse{2} Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and from thence
go ye to Hamath the great: then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be
they better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your
border? \bibverse{3} Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the
seat of violence to come near;+ 6.3 seat: or, habitation \bibverse{4}
That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches,
and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of
the stall;+ 6.4 stretch\ldots: or, abound with superfluities
\bibverse{5} That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to
themselves instruments of musick, like David;+ 6.5 chant: or, quaver
\bibverse{6} That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.+
6.6 wine\ldots: or, in bowls of wine+ 6.6 affliction: Heb. breach

\bibverse{7} ¶ Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that
go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be
removed.

\bibverse{8} The Lord GOD hath sworn by himself, saith the LORD the God
of hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces:
therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein.+ 6.8
that\ldots: Heb. the fulness thereof \bibverse{9} And it shall come to
pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.
\bibverse{10} And a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth
him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him
that is by the sides of the house, Is there yet any with thee? and he
shall say, No.~Then shall he say, Hold thy tongue: for we may not make
mention of the name of the LORD.+ 6.10 we\ldots: or, they will not, or,
have not \bibverse{11} For, behold, the LORD commandeth, and he will
smite the great house with breaches, and the little house with clefts.+
6.11 breaches: or, droppings

\bibverse{12} ¶ Shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with
oxen? for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of
righteousness into hemlock: \bibverse{13} Ye which rejoice in a thing of
nought, which say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?
\bibverse{14} But, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house
of Israel, saith the LORD the God of hosts; and they shall afflict you
from the entering in of Hemath unto the river of the wilderness.+ 6.14
river: or, valley

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibverse{1} Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me; and, behold, he
formed grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter
growth; and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.+ 7.1
grasshoppers: or, green worms \bibverse{2} And it came to pass, that
when they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said,
O Lord GOD, forgive, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he
is small.+ 7.2 by\ldots: or, who of (or, for,) Jacob shall stand?
\bibverse{3} The LORD repented for this: It shall not be, saith the
LORD.

\bibverse{4} ¶ Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and, behold, the
Lord GOD called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and
did eat up a part. \bibverse{5} Then said I, O Lord GOD, cease, I
beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.+ 7.5 by\ldots:
or, who of (or, for,) Jacob shall stand? \bibverse{6} The LORD repented
for this: This also shall not be, saith the Lord GOD.

\bibverse{7} ¶ Thus he shewed me: and, behold, the Lord stood upon a
wall made by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand. \bibverse{8} And
the LORD said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A plumbline.
Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumbline in the midst of my
people Israel: I will not again pass by them any more: \bibverse{9} And
the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of
Israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise against the house of
Jeroboam with the sword.

\bibverse{10} ¶ Then Amaziah the priest of Beth-el sent to Jeroboam king
of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the
house of Israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.
\bibverse{11} For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and
Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.
\bibverse{12} Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee
away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there:
\bibverse{13} But prophesy not again any more at Beth-el: for it is the
king's chapel, and it is the king's court.+ 7.13 chapel: or, sanctuary+
7.13 king's court: Heb. house of the kingdom

\bibverse{14} ¶ Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no
prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a
gatherer of sycomore fruit:+ 7.14 sycomore\ldots: or, wild figs
\bibverse{15} And the LORD took me as I followed the flock, and the LORD
said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.+ 7.15 as\ldots: Heb.
from behind

\bibverse{16} ¶ Now therefore hear thou the word of the LORD: Thou
sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the
house of Isaac. \bibverse{17} Therefore thus saith the LORD; Thy wife
shall be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall
fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt
die in a polluted land: and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth
of his land.

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibverse{1} Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and behold a basket
of summer fruit. \bibverse{2} And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I
said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said the LORD unto me, The end is
come upon my people of Israel; I will not again pass by them any more.
\bibverse{3} And the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day,
saith the Lord GOD: there shall be many dead bodies in every place; they
shall cast them forth with silence.+ 8.3 shall be howlings: Heb. shall
howl+ 8.3 with\ldots: Heb. be silent

\bibverse{4} ¶ Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make
the poor of the land to fail, \bibverse{5} Saying, When will the new
moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set
forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and
falsifying the balances by deceit?+ 8.5 new\ldots: or, month+ 8.5
set\ldots: Heb. open+ 8.5 falsifying\ldots: Heb. perverting the balances
of deceit \bibverse{6} That we may buy the poor for silver, and the
needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?
\bibverse{7} The LORD hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I
will never forget any of their works. \bibverse{8} Shall not the land
tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? and it
shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall be cast out and drowned,
as by the flood of Egypt. \bibverse{9} And it shall come to pass in that
day, saith the Lord GOD, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon,
and I will darken the earth in the clear day: \bibverse{10} And I will
turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and
I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head;
and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof
as a bitter day.

\bibverse{11} ¶ Behold, the days come, saith the Lord GOD, that I will
send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for
water, but of hearing the words of the LORD: \bibverse{12} And they
shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they
shall run to and fro to seek the word of the LORD, and shall not find
it. \bibverse{13} In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint
for thirst. \bibverse{14} They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and
say, Thy god, O Dan, liveth; and, The manner of Beer-sheba liveth; even
they shall fall, and never rise up again.+ 8.14 manner: Heb. way

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibverse{1} I saw the Lord standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite
the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the
head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he
that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them
shall not be delivered.+ 9.1 lintel: or, chapiter, or, knop+ 9.1
cut\ldots: or, wound them \bibverse{2} Though they dig into hell, thence
shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I
bring them down: \bibverse{3} And though they hide themselves in the top
of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be
hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the
serpent, and he shall bite them: \bibverse{4} And though they go into
captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it
shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not
for good. \bibverse{5} And the Lord GOD of hosts is he that toucheth the
land, and it shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it
shall rise up wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by the flood
of Egypt. \bibverse{6} It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven,
and hath founded his troop in the earth; he that calleth for the waters
of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD is
his name.+ 9.6 stories: or, spheres: Heb. ascensions+ 9.6 troop: or,
bundle \bibverse{7} Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O
children of Israel? saith the LORD. Have not I brought up Israel out of
the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians
from Kir? \bibverse{8} Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the
sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth;
saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the
LORD. \bibverse{9} For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of
Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall
not the least grain fall upon the earth.+ 9.9 sift: Heb. cause to move+
9.9 grain: Heb. stone \bibverse{10} All the sinners of my people shall
die by the sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

\bibverse{11} ¶ In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that
is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his
ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old:+ 9.11 close: Heb.
hedge, or, wall \bibverse{12} That they may possess the remnant of Edom,
and of all the heathen, which are called by my name, saith the LORD that
doeth this.+ 9.12 which\ldots: Heb. upon whom my name is called
\bibverse{13} Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman
shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth
seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall
melt.+ 9.13 soweth: Heb. draweth forth+ 9.13 sweet: or, new
\bibverse{14} And I will bring again the captivity of my people of
Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and
they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also
make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. \bibverse{15} And I will plant
them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their
land which I have given them, saith the LORD thy God.
