\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum
the Elkoshite.

\bibleverse{2} God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the LORD
revengeth, and is furious; the LORD will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his
enemies.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{1:2} God\ldots: or, The LORD is a
jealous God, and a revenger, etc{]}}{[}\textbf{1:2} is furious: Heb.
that hath fury{]} \bibleverse{3} The LORD is slow to anger, and great in
power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the LORD hath his way in
the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.
\bibleverse{4} He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all
the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon
languisheth. \bibleverse{5} The mountains quake at him, and the hills
melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all
that dwell therein. \bibleverse{6} Who can stand before his indignation?
and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out
like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.\footnote{\textbf{1:6}
  abide: Heb. stand up} \bibleverse{7} The LORD is good, a strong hold
in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.\footnote{\textbf{1:7}
  strong hold: or, strength} \bibleverse{8} But with an overrunning
flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall
pursue his enemies.

\bibleverse{9} What do ye imagine against the LORD? he will make an
utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time. \bibleverse{10}
For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken
as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.
\bibleverse{11} There is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil
against the LORD, a wicked counsellor.\footnote{\textbf{1:11} a
  wicked\ldots: Heb. a counsellor of Belial} \bibleverse{12} Thus saith
the LORD; Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shall they
be cut down, when he shall pass through. Though I have afflicted thee, I
will afflict thee no more.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{1:12}
Though\ldots: or, If they would have been at peace, so should they have
been many, and so should they have been shorn, and he should have passed
away{]}}{[}\textbf{1:12} cut down: Heb. shorn{]} \bibleverse{13} For now
will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder.
\bibleverse{14} And the LORD hath given a commandment concerning thee,
that no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I
cut off the graven image and the molten image: I will make thy grave;
for thou art vile. \bibleverse{15} Behold upon the mountains the feet of
him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy
solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass
through thee; he is utterly cut off.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{1:15}
keep\ldots: Heb. feast{]}}{[}\textbf{1:15} the wicked: Heb. Belial{]}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face:
keep the munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy
power mightily.\footnote{\textbf{2:1} He\ldots: or, The disperser, or,
  hammer} \bibleverse{2} For the LORD hath turned away the excellency of
Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them
out, and marred their vine branches.\footnote{\textbf{2:2} the
  excellency of Jacob\ldots: or, the pride of Jacob as the pride, etc}
\bibleverse{3} The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men
are in scarlet: the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of
his preparation, and the fir trees shall be terribly
shaken.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{2:3} in scarlet: or, dyed
scarlet{]}}{[}\textbf{2:3} flaming: or, fiery{]} \bibleverse{4} The
chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against
another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run
like the lightnings.\footnote{\textbf{2:4} they: Heb. their show}
\bibleverse{5} He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in
their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence
shall be prepared.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{2:5} worthies: or,
gallants{]}}{[}\textbf{2:5} defence: Heb. covering, or, coverer{]}
\bibleverse{6} The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace
shall be dissolved.\footnote{\textbf{2:6} dissolved: or, molten}
\bibleverse{7} And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be
brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves,
tabering upon their breasts.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{2:7} Huzzab: or,
that which was established, or, there was a stand
made{]}}{[}\textbf{2:7} led\ldots: or, discovered{]} \bibleverse{8} But
Nineveh is of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand,
stand, shall they cry; but none shall look
back.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{2:8} of old: or, from the days that she
hath been{]}}{[}\textbf{2:8} look back: or, cause them to turn{]}
\bibleverse{9} Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for
there is none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant
furniture.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{2:9} for\ldots: or, and their
infinite store, etc{]}}{[}\textbf{2:9} pleasant\ldots: Heb. vessels of
desire{]} \bibleverse{10} She is empty, and void, and waste: and the
heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain is in all
loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.

\bibleverse{11} Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace
of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the
lion's whelp, and none made them afraid? \bibleverse{12} The lion did
tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses,
and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. \bibleverse{13}
Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will burn her
chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions: and I
will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers
shall no more be heard.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and
robbery; the prey departeth not;\footnote{\textbf{3:1} bloody\ldots:
  Heb. city of bloods} \bibleverse{2} The noise of a whip, and the noise
of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the
jumping chariots. \bibleverse{3} The horseman lifteth up both the bright
sword and the glittering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and a
great number of carcases; and there is none end of their corpses; they
stumble upon their corpses:\footnote{\textbf{3:3} the bright\ldots: Heb.
  the flame of the sword, and the lightning of the spear} \bibleverse{4}
Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot,
the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms,
and families through her witchcrafts. \bibleverse{5} Behold, I am
against thee, saith the LORD of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts
upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the
kingdoms thy shame. \bibleverse{6} And I will cast abominable filth upon
thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock.
\bibleverse{7} And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon
thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste: who will
bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?

\bibleverse{8} Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among
the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the
sea, and her wall was from the sea?+ 3.8 populous\ldots: or, nourishing,
etc: Heb. No Amon \bibleverse{9} Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength,
and it was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.+ 3.9 thy helpers:
Heb. in thy help \bibleverse{10} Yet was she carried away, she went into
captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of
all the streets: and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her
great men were bound in chains. \bibleverse{11} Thou also shalt be
drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of the
enemy. \bibleverse{12} All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with
the firstripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the
mouth of the eater. \bibleverse{13} Behold, thy people in the midst of
thee are women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine
enemies: the fire shall devour thy bars. \bibleverse{14} Draw thee
waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread
the morter, make strong the brickkiln. \bibleverse{15} There shall the
fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up
like the cankerworm: make thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself
many as the locusts. \bibleverse{16} Thou hast multiplied thy merchants
above the stars of heaven: the cankerworm spoileth, and flieth away.+
3.16 spoileth: or, spreadeth himself \bibleverse{17} Thy crowned are as
the locusts, and thy captains as the great grasshoppers, which camp in
the hedges in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and
their place is not known where they are. \bibleverse{18} Thy shepherds
slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell in the dust: thy
people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathereth them.+ 3.18
nobles: or, valiant ones \bibleverse{19} There is no healing of thy
bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall
clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed
continually?+ 3.19 healing: Heb. wrinkling
