\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The word of the LORD which came unto Zephaniah the son of
Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in
the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah. \bibleverse{2} I will
utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the
LORD.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{1:2} I will\ldots: Heb. By taking away
I will make an end{]}}{[}\textbf{1:2} the land: Heb. the face of the
land{]} \bibleverse{3} I will consume man and beast; I will consume the
fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumblingblocks
with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the
LORD.\footnote{\textbf{1:3} stumblingblocks: or, idols} \bibleverse{4} I
will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place,
and the name of the Chemarims with the priests; \bibleverse{5} And them
that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that
worship and that swear by the LORD, and that swear by
Malcham;\footnote{\textbf{1:5} by the\ldots: or, to the LORD}
\bibleverse{6} And them that are turned back from the LORD; and those
that have not sought the LORD, nor enquired for him.

\bibleverse{7} Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord GOD: for the
day of the LORD is at hand: for the LORD hath prepared a sacrifice, he
hath bid his guests.\footnote{\textbf{1:7} bid: Heb. sanctified, or,
  prepared} \bibleverse{8} And it shall come to pass in the day of the
LORD's sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the king's
children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.\footnote{\textbf{1:8}
  punish: Heb. visit upon} \bibleverse{9} In the same day also will I
punish all those that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters'
houses with violence and deceit. \bibleverse{10} And it shall come to
pass in that day, saith the LORD, that there shall be the noise of a cry
from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing
from the hills. \bibleverse{11} Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all
the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.
\bibleverse{12} And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will
search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on
their lees: that say in their heart, The LORD will not do good, neither
will he do evil.\footnote{\textbf{1:12} settled: Heb. curded, or,
  thickened} \bibleverse{13} Therefore their goods shall become a booty,
and their houses a desolation: they shall also build houses, but not
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine
thereof.

\bibleverse{14} The great day of the LORD is near, it is near, and
hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the LORD: the mighty man
shall cry there bitterly. \bibleverse{15} That day is a day of wrath, a
day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
\bibleverse{16} A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced
cities, and against the high towers. \bibleverse{17} And I will bring
distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they
have sinned against the LORD: and their blood shall be poured out as
dust, and their flesh as the dung. \bibleverse{18} Neither their silver
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the LORD's
wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy:
for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the
land.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O
nation not desired;\footnote{\textbf{2:1} not\ldots: or, not desirous}
\bibleverse{2} Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chaff, before the fierce anger of the LORD come upon you, before the day
of the LORD's anger come upon you. \bibleverse{3} Seek ye the LORD, all
ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek
righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of
the LORD's anger.

\bibleverse{4} For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation:
they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted
up. \bibleverse{5} Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation
of the Cherethites! the word of the LORD is against you; O Canaan, the
land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be
no inhabitant. \bibleverse{6} And the sea coast shall be dwellings and
cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks. \bibleverse{7} And the
coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they shall feed
thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening:
for the LORD their God shall visit them, and turn away their
captivity.\footnote{\textbf{2:7} for the LORD: or, when, etc}

\bibleverse{8} I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of
the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and
magnified themselves against their border. \bibleverse{9} Therefore as I
live, saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be
as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of
nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my
people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess
them. \bibleverse{10} This shall they have for their pride, because they
have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the LORD
of hosts. \bibleverse{11} The LORD will be terrible unto them: for he
will famish all the gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every
one from his place, even all the isles of the heathen.\footnote{\textbf{2:11}
  famish: Heb. make lean}

\bibleverse{12} Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.
\bibleverse{13} And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and
destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a
wilderness. \bibleverse{14} And flocks shall lie down in the midst of
her, all the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern
shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the
windows; desolation shall be in the thresholds: for he shall uncover the
cedar work.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{2:14} cormorant: or,
pelican{]}}{[}\textbf{2:14} upper\ldots: or, knops, or,
chapiters{]}\footnote{\textbf{2:14} for\ldots: or, when he hath
  uncovered} \bibleverse{15} This is the rejoicing city that dwelt
carelessly, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me:
how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every
one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing
city!\footnote{\textbf{3:1} her\ldots: or, gluttonous: Heb. craw}
\bibleverse{2} She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction;
she trusted not in the LORD; she drew not near to her God.\footnote{\textbf{3:2}
  correction: or, instruction} \bibleverse{3} Her princes within her are
roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones
till the morrow. \bibleverse{4} Her prophets are light and treacherous
persons: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done
violence to the law. \bibleverse{5} The just LORD is in the midst
thereof; he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his
judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no
shame.\footnote{\textbf{3:5} every\ldots: Heb. morning by morning}
\bibleverse{6} I have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate; I
made their streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities are
destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none
inhabitant.\footnote{\textbf{3:6} towers: or, corners} \bibleverse{7} I
said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so their
dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose
early, and corrupted all their doings.

\bibleverse{8} Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until the day
that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the
nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine
indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be
devoured with the fire of my jealousy. \bibleverse{9} For then will I
turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name
of the LORD, to serve him with one
consent.\textsuperscript{{[}\textbf{3:9} language: Heb.
lip{]}}{[}\textbf{3:9} consent: Heb. shoulder{]} \bibleverse{10} From
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter of my
dispersed, shall bring mine offering. \bibleverse{11} In that day shalt
thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed
against me: for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that
rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my
holy mountain.\footnote{\textbf{3:11} because\ldots: Heb. in my holy}
\bibleverse{12} I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and
poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the LORD.
\bibleverse{13} The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak
lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they
shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

\bibleverse{14} Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and
rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{15} The
LORD hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the
king of Israel, even the LORD, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not
see evil any more. \bibleverse{16} In that day it shall be said to
Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.+
3.16 slack: or, faint \bibleverse{17} The LORD thy God in the midst of
thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he
will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.+ 3.17 rest:
Heb. be silent \bibleverse{18} I will gather them that are sorrowful for
the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a
burden.+ 3.18 reproach\ldots: Heb. the burden upon it was reproach
\bibleverse{19} Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee:
and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out;
and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been
put to shame.+ 3.19 get\ldots: Heb. set them for a praise+ 3.19
where\ldots: Heb. of their shame \bibleverse{20} At that time will I
bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you
a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity before your eyes, saith the LORD.
