\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. \bibleverse{2} The same was in the beginning with
God. \bibleverse{3} All things were made by him; and without him was not
any thing made that was made. \bibleverse{4} In him was life; and the
life was the light of men. \bibleverse{5} And the light shineth in
darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.

\bibleverse{6} There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
\bibleverse{7} The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the
Light, that all men through him might believe. \bibleverse{8} He was not
that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. \bibleverse{9}
That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world. \bibleverse{10} He was in the world, and the world was made by
him, and the world knew him not. \bibleverse{11} He came unto his own,
and his own received him not. \bibleverse{12} But as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that
believe on his name: \bibleverse{13} Which were born, not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
\bibleverse{14} And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full
of grace and truth.

\bibleverse{15} John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he
of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is preferred before me: for he
was before me. \bibleverse{16} And of his fulness have all we received,
and grace for grace. \bibleverse{17} For the law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. \bibleverse{18} No man hath seen
God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he hath declared him.

\bibleverse{19} And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent
priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?
\bibleverse{20} And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am
not the Christ. \bibleverse{21} And they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered,
No.~\bibleverse{22} Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may
give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?
\bibleverse{23} He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias.
\bibleverse{24} And they which were sent were of the Pharisees.
\bibleverse{25} And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest
thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?
\bibleverse{26} John answered them, saying, I baptize with water: but
there standeth one among you, whom ye know not; \bibleverse{27} He it
is, who coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I
am not worthy to unloose. \bibleverse{28} These things were done in
Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

\bibleverse{29} The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and
saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.
\bibleverse{30} This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which
is preferred before me: for he was before me. \bibleverse{31} And I knew
him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I
come baptizing with water. \bibleverse{32} And John bare record, saying,
I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon
him. \bibleverse{33} And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize
with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit
descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost. \bibleverse{34} And I saw, and bare record that this is
the Son of God.

\bibleverse{35} Again the next day after John stood, and two of his
disciples; \bibleverse{36} And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he
saith, Behold the Lamb of God! \bibleverse{37} And the two disciples
heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. \bibleverse{38} Then Jesus
turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What seek ye? They
said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,)
where dwellest thou? \bibleverse{39} He saith unto them, Come and see.
They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it
was about the tenth hour. \bibleverse{40} One of the two which heard
John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.
\bibleverse{41} He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto
him, We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.
\bibleverse{42} And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him,
he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be called Cephas,
which is by interpretation, A stone.

\bibleverse{43} The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and
findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me. \bibleverse{44} Now
Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. \bibleverse{45}
Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom
Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the
son of Joseph. \bibleverse{46} And Nathanael said unto him, Can there
any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and
see. \bibleverse{47} Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of
him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile! \bibleverse{48}
Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and
said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the
fig tree, I saw thee. \bibleverse{49} Nathanael answered and saith unto
him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.
\bibleverse{50} Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto
thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see
greater things than these. \bibleverse{51} And he saith unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and
the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of
Galilee; and the mother of Jesus was there: \bibleverse{2} And both
Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage. \bibleverse{3} And
when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no
wine. \bibleverse{4} Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with
thee? mine hour is not yet come. \bibleverse{5} His mother saith unto
the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it. \bibleverse{6} And
there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
\bibleverse{7} Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And
they filled them up to the brim. \bibleverse{8} And he saith unto them,
Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it.
\bibleverse{9} When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was
made wine, and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the
water knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom,
\bibleverse{10} And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set
forth good wine; and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse:
but thou hast kept the good wine until now. \bibleverse{11} This
beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth
his glory; and his disciples believed on him.

\bibleverse{12} After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his
mother, and his brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there
not many days.

\bibleverse{13} And the Jews' passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem, \bibleverse{14} And found in the temple those that sold oxen
and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting: \bibleverse{15}
And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of
the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers'
money, and overthrew the tables; \bibleverse{16} And said unto them that
sold doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father's house an house
of merchandise. \bibleverse{17} And his disciples remembered that it was
written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.

\bibleverse{18} Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign
shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?
\bibleverse{19} Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple,
and in three days I will raise it up. \bibleverse{20} Then said the
Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou
rear it up in three days? \bibleverse{21} But he spake of the temple of
his body. \bibleverse{22} When therefore he was risen from the dead, his
disciples remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed
the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

\bibleverse{23} Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the
feast day, many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which
he did. \bibleverse{24} But Jesus did not commit himself unto them,
because he knew all men, \bibleverse{25} And needed not that any should
testify of man: for he knew what was in man.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a
ruler of the Jews: \bibleverse{2} The same came to Jesus by night, and
said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for
no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him.
\bibleverse{3} Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
\bibleverse{4} Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he
is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be
born? \bibleverse{5} Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. \bibleverse{6} That which is born of the flesh is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. \bibleverse{7}
Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. \bibleverse{8}
The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof,
but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every
one that is born of the Spirit. \bibleverse{9} Nicodemus answered and
said unto him, How can these things be? \bibleverse{10} Jesus answered
and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these
things? \bibleverse{11} Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that
we do know, and testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our
witness. \bibleverse{12} If I have told you earthly things, and ye
believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things?
\bibleverse{13} And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven.

\bibleverse{14} And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the Son of man be lifted up: \bibleverse{15} That whosoever
believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life.

\bibleverse{16} For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. \bibleverse{17} For God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be
saved.

\bibleverse{18} He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that
believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God. \bibleverse{19} And this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. \bibleverse{20} For
every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved. \bibleverse{21} But he that doeth
truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God.

\bibleverse{22} After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the
land of Judæa; and there he tarried with them, and baptized.

\bibleverse{23} And John also was baptizing in Ænon near to Salim,
because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized.
\bibleverse{24} For John was not yet cast into prison.

\bibleverse{25} Then there arose a question between some of John's
disciples and the Jews about purifying. \bibleverse{26} And they came
unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond
Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all
men come to him. \bibleverse{27} John answered and said, A man can
receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. \bibleverse{28} Ye
yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I
am sent before him. \bibleverse{29} He that hath the bride is the
bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth
him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy
therefore is fulfilled. \bibleverse{30} He must increase, but I must
decrease. \bibleverse{31} He that cometh from above is above all: he
that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that
cometh from heaven is above all. \bibleverse{32} And what he hath seen
and heard, that he testifieth; and no man receiveth his testimony.
\bibleverse{33} He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal
that God is true. \bibleverse{34} For he whom God hath sent speaketh the
words of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him.
\bibleverse{35} The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things
into his hand. \bibleverse{36} He that believeth on the Son hath
everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life;
but the wrath of God abideth on him.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard
that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, \bibleverse{2}
(Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples,) \bibleverse{3}
He left Judæa, and departed again into Galilee. \bibleverse{4} And he
must needs go through Samaria. \bibleverse{5} Then cometh he to a city
of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that
Jacob gave to his son Joseph. \bibleverse{6} Now Jacob's well was there.
Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat thus on the well:
and it was about the sixth hour. \bibleverse{7} There cometh a woman of
Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her, Give me to drink.
\bibleverse{8} (For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy
meat.) \bibleverse{9} Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is
it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of
Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.
\bibleverse{10} Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the
gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou
wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
\bibleverse{11} The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw
with, and the well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living
water? \bibleverse{12} Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which
gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his
cattle? \bibleverse{13} Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever
drinketh of this water shall thirst again: \bibleverse{14} But whosoever
drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the
water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life. \bibleverse{15} The woman saith unto him, Sir,
give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.
\bibleverse{16} Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come
hither. \bibleverse{17} The woman answered and said, I have no husband.
Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband:
\bibleverse{18} For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now
hast is not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly. \bibleverse{19} The
woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.
\bibleverse{20} Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say,
that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
\bibleverse{21} Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour
cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
worship the Father. \bibleverse{22} Ye worship ye know not what: we know
what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews. \bibleverse{23} But the
hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship
him. \bibleverse{24} God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must
worship him in spirit and in truth. \bibleverse{25} The woman saith unto
him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is
come, he will tell us all things. \bibleverse{26} Jesus saith unto her,
I that speak unto thee am he.

\bibleverse{27} And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he
talked with the woman: yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why
talkest thou with her? \bibleverse{28} The woman then left her waterpot,
and went her way into the city, and saith to the men, \bibleverse{29}
Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this
the Christ? \bibleverse{30} Then they went out of the city, and came
unto him.

\bibleverse{31} In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying,
Master, eat. \bibleverse{32} But he said unto them, I have meat to eat
that ye know not of. \bibleverse{33} Therefore said the disciples one to
another, Hath any man brought him ought to eat? \bibleverse{34} Jesus
saith unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
finish his work. \bibleverse{35} Say not ye, There are yet four months,
and then cometh harvest? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and
look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest.
\bibleverse{36} And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit
unto life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may
rejoice together. \bibleverse{37} And herein is that saying true, One
soweth, and another reapeth. \bibleverse{38} I sent you to reap that
whereon ye bestowed no labour: other men laboured, and ye are entered
into their labours.

\bibleverse{39} And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him
for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I
did. \bibleverse{40} So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they
besought him that he would tarry with them: and he abode there two days.
\bibleverse{41} And many more believed because of his own word;
\bibleverse{42} And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of
thy saying: for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.

\bibleverse{43} Now after two days he departed thence, and went into
Galilee. \bibleverse{44} For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet
hath no honour in his own country. \bibleverse{45} Then when he was come
into Galilee, the Galilæans received him, having seen all the things
that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the
feast. \bibleverse{46} So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where
he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was
sick at Capernaum. \bibleverse{47} When he heard that Jesus was come out
of Judæa into Galilee, he went unto him, and besought him that he would
come down, and heal his son: for he was at the point of death.
\bibleverse{48} Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe. \bibleverse{49} The nobleman saith unto
him, Sir, come down ere my child die. \bibleverse{50} Jesus saith unto
him, Go thy way; thy son liveth. And the man believed the word that
Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way. \bibleverse{51} And as
he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy
son liveth. \bibleverse{52} Then enquired he of them the hour when he
began to amend. And they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour
the fever left him. \bibleverse{53} So the father knew that it was at
the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth: and
himself believed, and his whole house. \bibleverse{54} This is again the
second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of Judæa into
Galilee.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem. \bibleverse{2} Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep
market a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having
five porches. \bibleverse{3} In these lay a great multitude of impotent
folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water.
\bibleverse{4} For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool,
and troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the
water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.
\bibleverse{5} And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity
thirty and eight years. \bibleverse{6} When Jesus saw him lie, and knew
that he had been now a long time in that case, he saith unto him, Wilt
thou be made whole? \bibleverse{7} The impotent man answered him, Sir, I
have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool: but
while I am coming, another steppeth down before me. \bibleverse{8} Jesus
saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk. \bibleverse{9} And
immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked: and
on the same day was the sabbath.

\bibleverse{10} The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is
the sabbath day: it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.
\bibleverse{11} He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said
unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk. \bibleverse{12} Then asked they him,
What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed, and walk?
\bibleverse{13} And he that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus
had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place.
\bibleverse{14} Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto
him, Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee. \bibleverse{15} The man departed, and told the Jews that it
was Jesus, which had made him whole. \bibleverse{16} And therefore did
the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done
these things on the sabbath day.

\bibleverse{17} But Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and
I work. \bibleverse{18} Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him,
because he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was
his Father, making himself equal with God. \bibleverse{19} Then answered
Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do
nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things
soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. \bibleverse{20} For
the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself
doeth: and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may
marvel. \bibleverse{21} For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and
quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.
\bibleverse{22} For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all
judgment unto the Son: \bibleverse{23} That all men should honour the
Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son
honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. \bibleverse{24} Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him
that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. \bibleverse{25}
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall
live. \bibleverse{26} For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he
given to the Son to have life in himself; \bibleverse{27} And hath given
him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.
\bibleverse{28} Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, \bibleverse{29} And
shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.
\bibleverse{30} I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge:
and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will
of the Father which hath sent me. \bibleverse{31} If I bear witness of
myself, my witness is not true.

\bibleverse{32} There is another that beareth witness of me; and I know
that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true. \bibleverse{33} Ye
sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. \bibleverse{34} But
I receive not testimony from man: but these things I say, that ye might
be saved. \bibleverse{35} He was a burning and a shining light: and ye
were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.

\bibleverse{36} But I have greater witness than that of John: for the
works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I
do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. \bibleverse{37}
And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye
have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.
\bibleverse{38} And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he
hath sent, him ye believe not.

\bibleverse{39} Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have
eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. \bibleverse{40} And
ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. \bibleverse{41} I
receive not honour from men. \bibleverse{42} But I know you, that ye
have not the love of God in you. \bibleverse{43} I am come in my
Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own
name, him ye will receive. \bibleverse{44} How can ye believe, which
receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from
God only? \bibleverse{45} Do not think that I will accuse you to the
Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.
\bibleverse{46} For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me:
for he wrote of me. \bibleverse{47} But if ye believe not his writings,
how shall ye believe my words?

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee,
which is the sea of Tiberias. \bibleverse{2} And a great multitude
followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on them that
were diseased. \bibleverse{3} And Jesus went up into a mountain, and
there he sat with his disciples. \bibleverse{4} And the passover, a
feast of the Jews, was nigh.

\bibleverse{5} When Jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great
company come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread,
that these may eat? \bibleverse{6} And this he said to prove him: for he
himself knew what he would do. \bibleverse{7} Philip answered him, Two
hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one
of them may take a little. \bibleverse{8} One of his disciples, Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him, \bibleverse{9} There is a lad
here, which hath five barley loaves, and two small fishes: but what are
they among so many? \bibleverse{10} And Jesus said, Make the men sit
down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in
number about five thousand. \bibleverse{11} And Jesus took the loaves;
and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the
disciples to them that were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much
as they would. \bibleverse{12} When they were filled, he said unto his
disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.
\bibleverse{13} Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve
baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained
over and above unto them that had eaten. \bibleverse{14} Then those men,
when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth
that prophet that should come into the world.

\bibleverse{15} When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and
take him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain
himself alone. \bibleverse{16} And when even was now come, his disciples
went down unto the sea, \bibleverse{17} And entered into a ship, and
went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was
not come to them. \bibleverse{18} And the sea arose by reason of a great
wind that blew. \bibleverse{19} So when they had rowed about five and
twenty or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea, and
drawing nigh unto the ship: and they were afraid. \bibleverse{20} But he
saith unto them, It is I; be not afraid. \bibleverse{21} Then they
willingly received him into the ship: and immediately the ship was at
the land whither they went.

\bibleverse{22} The day following, when the people which stood on the
other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save
that one whereinto his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not
with his disciples into the boat, but that his disciples were gone away
alone; \bibleverse{23} (Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias
nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had
given thanks:) \bibleverse{24} When the people therefore saw that Jesus
was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came
to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus. \bibleverse{25} And when they had found
him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest
thou hither? \bibleverse{26} Jesus answered them and said, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. \bibleverse{27}
Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which
endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto
you: for him hath God the Father sealed. \bibleverse{28} Then said they
unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?
\bibleverse{29} Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of
God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. \bibleverse{30} They said
therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and
believe thee? what dost thou work? \bibleverse{31} Our fathers did eat
manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to
eat. \bibleverse{32} Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father
giveth you the true bread from heaven. \bibleverse{33} For the bread of
God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.
\bibleverse{34} Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this
bread. \bibleverse{35} And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life:
he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me
shall never thirst. \bibleverse{36} But I said unto you, That ye also
have seen me, and believe not. \bibleverse{37} All that the Father
giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise
cast out. \bibleverse{38} For I came down from heaven, not to do mine
own will, but the will of him that sent me. \bibleverse{39} And this is
the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me
I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
\bibleverse{40} And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life:
and I will raise him up at the last day. \bibleverse{41} The Jews then
murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from
heaven. \bibleverse{42} And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I
came down from heaven? \bibleverse{43} Jesus therefore answered and said
unto them, Murmur not among yourselves. \bibleverse{44} No man can come
to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise
him up at the last day. \bibleverse{45} It is written in the prophets,
And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath
heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me. \bibleverse{46}
Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath
seen the Father. \bibleverse{47} Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
believeth on me hath everlasting life. \bibleverse{48} I am that bread
of life. \bibleverse{49} Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness,
and are dead. \bibleverse{50} This is the bread which cometh down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. \bibleverse{51} I am
the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. \bibleverse{52} The
Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us
his flesh to eat? \bibleverse{53} Then Jesus said unto them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you. \bibleverse{54} Whoso eateth my
flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up
at the last day. \bibleverse{55} For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed. \bibleverse{56} He that eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. \bibleverse{57} As the
living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth
me, even he shall live by me. \bibleverse{58} This is that bread which
came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead:
he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever. \bibleverse{59} These
things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
\bibleverse{60} Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard
this, said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it? \bibleverse{61}
When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said
unto them, Doth this offend you? \bibleverse{62} What and if ye shall
see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? \bibleverse{63} It is
the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. \bibleverse{64}
But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him.
\bibleverse{65} And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can
come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father.

\bibleverse{66} From that time many of his disciples went back, and
walked no more with him. \bibleverse{67} Then said Jesus unto the
twelve, Will ye also go away? \bibleverse{68} Then Simon Peter answered
him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life.
\bibleverse{69} And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ,
the Son of the living God. \bibleverse{70} Jesus answered them, Have not
I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? \bibleverse{71} He spake
of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should betray
him, being one of the twelve.

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would
not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him. \bibleverse{2}
Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand. \bibleverse{3} His
brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judæa, that
thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. \bibleverse{4} For
there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh
to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world.
\bibleverse{5} For neither did his brethren believe in him.
\bibleverse{6} Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but
your time is alway ready. \bibleverse{7} The world cannot hate you; but
me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil.
\bibleverse{8} Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this
feast; for my time is not yet full come. \bibleverse{9} When he had said
these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee.

\bibleverse{10} But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up
unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. \bibleverse{11}
Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he?
\bibleverse{12} And there was much murmuring among the people concerning
him: for some said, He is a good man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth
the people. \bibleverse{13} Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear
of the Jews.

\bibleverse{14} Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the
temple, and taught. \bibleverse{15} And the Jews marvelled, saying, How
knoweth this man letters, having never learned? \bibleverse{16} Jesus
answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.
\bibleverse{17} If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.
\bibleverse{18} He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but
he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. \bibleverse{19} Did not Moses give you the
law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me?
\bibleverse{20} The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil: who
goeth about to kill thee? \bibleverse{21} Jesus answered and said unto
them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel. \bibleverse{22} Moses
therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but
of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man.
\bibleverse{23} If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that
the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I
have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day? \bibleverse{24}
Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.
\bibleverse{25} Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he,
whom they seek to kill? \bibleverse{26} But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and
they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the
very Christ? \bibleverse{27} Howbeit we know this man whence he is: but
when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. \bibleverse{28} Then
cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye
know whence I am: and I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is
true, whom ye know not. \bibleverse{29} But I know him: for I am from
him, and he hath sent me. \bibleverse{30} Then they sought to take him:
but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.
\bibleverse{31} And many of the people believed on him, and said, When
Christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this man hath
done?

\bibleverse{32} The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things
concerning him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to
take him. \bibleverse{33} Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while
am I with you, and then I go unto him that sent me. \bibleverse{34} Ye
shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot
come. \bibleverse{35} Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will
he go, that we shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among
the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles? \bibleverse{36} What manner of
saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me:
and where I am, thither ye cannot come? \bibleverse{37} In the last day,
that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. \bibleverse{38} He that
believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. \bibleverse{39} (But this spake he of the
Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the Holy
Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.)

\bibleverse{40} Many of the people therefore, when they heard this
saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet. \bibleverse{41} Others
said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of
Galilee? \bibleverse{42} Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh
of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?
\bibleverse{43} So there was a division among the people because of him.
\bibleverse{44} And some of them would have taken him; but no man laid
hands on him.

\bibleverse{45} Then came the officers to the chief priests and
Pharisees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him?
\bibleverse{46} The officers answered, Never man spake like this man.
\bibleverse{47} Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived?
\bibleverse{48} Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on
him? \bibleverse{49} But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.
\bibleverse{50} Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by
night, being one of them,) \bibleverse{51} Doth our law judge any man,
before it hear him, and know what he doeth? \bibleverse{52} They
answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and look:
for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. \bibleverse{53} And every man
went unto his own house.

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Jesus went unto the mount of Olives. \bibleverse{2} And
early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people
came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them. \bibleverse{3} And the
scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and
when they had set her in the midst, \bibleverse{4} They say unto him,
Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act.
\bibleverse{5} Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be
stoned: but what sayest thou? \bibleverse{6} This they said, tempting
him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and
with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not.
\bibleverse{7} So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself,
and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast
a stone at her. \bibleverse{8} And again he stooped down, and wrote on
the ground. \bibleverse{9} And they which heard it, being convicted by
their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even
unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the
midst. \bibleverse{10} When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none
but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers?
hath no man condemned thee? \bibleverse{11} She said, No man, Lord. And
Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.

\bibleverse{12} Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light
of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life. \bibleverse{13} The Pharisees therefore said
unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true.
\bibleverse{14} Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record
of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither
I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.
\bibleverse{15} Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.
\bibleverse{16} And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me. \bibleverse{17} It is also
written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.
\bibleverse{18} I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father
that sent me beareth witness of me. \bibleverse{19} Then said they unto
him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my
Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.
\bibleverse{20} These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in
the temple: and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come.
\bibleverse{21} Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye
shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come.
\bibleverse{22} Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he
saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come. \bibleverse{23} And he said unto
them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am
not of this world. \bibleverse{24} I said therefore unto you, that ye
shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die
in your sins. \bibleverse{25} Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And
Jesus saith unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the
beginning. \bibleverse{26} I have many things to say and to judge of
you: but he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things
which I have heard of him. \bibleverse{27} They understood not that he
spake to them of the Father. \bibleverse{28} Then said Jesus unto them,
When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he,
and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I
speak these things. \bibleverse{29} And he that sent me is with me: the
Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please
him. \bibleverse{30} As he spake these words, many believed on him.
\bibleverse{31} Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If
ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; \bibleverse{32}
And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

\bibleverse{33} They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never
in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?
\bibleverse{34} Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. \bibleverse{35} And the
servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth ever.
\bibleverse{36} If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed. \bibleverse{37} I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye
seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. \bibleverse{38} I
speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye
have seen with your father. \bibleverse{39} They answered and said unto
him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's
children, ye would do the works of Abraham. \bibleverse{40} But now ye
seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard
of God: this did not Abraham. \bibleverse{41} Ye do the deeds of your
father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have
one Father, even God. \bibleverse{42} Jesus said unto them, If God were
your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God;
neither came I of myself, but he sent me. \bibleverse{43} Why do ye not
understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word.
\bibleverse{44} Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not
in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie,
he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.
\bibleverse{45} And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not.
\bibleverse{46} Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the
truth, why do ye not believe me? \bibleverse{47} He that is of God
heareth God's words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of
God. \bibleverse{48} Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we
not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? \bibleverse{49}
Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye do
dishonour me. \bibleverse{50} And I seek not mine own glory: there is
one that seeketh and judgeth. \bibleverse{51} Verily, verily, I say unto
you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. \bibleverse{52}
Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham
is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he
shall never taste of death. \bibleverse{53} Art thou greater than our
father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest
thou thyself? \bibleverse{54} Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my
honour is nothing: it is my Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say,
that he is your God: \bibleverse{55} Yet ye have not known him; but I
know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a liar like
unto you: but I know him, and keep his saying. \bibleverse{56} Your
father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.
\bibleverse{57} Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty
years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? \bibleverse{58} Jesus said unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.
\bibleverse{59} Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid
himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them,
and so passed by.

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from
his birth. \bibleverse{2} And his disciples asked him, saying, Master,
who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?
\bibleverse{3} Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his
parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.
\bibleverse{4} I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is
day: the night cometh, when no man can work. \bibleverse{5} As long as I
am in the world, I am the light of the world. \bibleverse{6} When he had
thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he
anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, \bibleverse{7} And
said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which is by
interpretation, Sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came
seeing.

\bibleverse{8} The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen
him that he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged?
\bibleverse{9} Some said, This is he: others said, He is like him: but
he said, I am he. \bibleverse{10} Therefore said they unto him, How were
thine eyes opened? \bibleverse{11} He answered and said, A man that is
called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to
the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received
sight. \bibleverse{12} Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I
know not.

\bibleverse{13} They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was
blind. \bibleverse{14} And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the
clay, and opened his eyes. \bibleverse{15} Then again the Pharisees also
asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them, He put clay
upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. \bibleverse{16} Therefore said
some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not
the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such
miracles? And there was a division among them. \bibleverse{17} They say
unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened
thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet. \bibleverse{18} But the Jews did
not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his
sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his sight.
\bibleverse{19} And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye
say was born blind? how then doth he now see? \bibleverse{20} His
parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that
he was born blind: \bibleverse{21} But by what means he now seeth, we
know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask
him: he shall speak for himself. \bibleverse{22} These words spake his
parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already,
that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of
the synagogue. \bibleverse{23} Therefore said his parents, He is of age;
ask him. \bibleverse{24} Then again called they the man that was blind,
and said unto him, Give God the praise: we know that this man is a
sinner. \bibleverse{25} He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner or
no, I know not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.
\bibleverse{26} Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how
opened he thine eyes? \bibleverse{27} He answered them, I have told you
already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye
also be his disciples? \bibleverse{28} Then they reviled him, and said,
Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses' disciples. \bibleverse{29} We
know that God spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from
whence he is. \bibleverse{30} The man answered and said unto them, Why
herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and
yet he hath opened mine eyes. \bibleverse{31} Now we know that God
heareth not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth
his will, him he heareth. \bibleverse{32} Since the world began was it
not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind.
\bibleverse{33} If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.
\bibleverse{34} They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether
born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.
\bibleverse{35} Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had
found him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God?
\bibleverse{36} He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might
believe on him? \bibleverse{37} And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both
seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee. \bibleverse{38} And he
said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him.

\bibleverse{39} And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world,
that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made
blind. \bibleverse{40} And some of the Pharisees which were with him
heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also? \bibleverse{41}
Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now
ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth.

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by
the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is
a thief and a robber. \bibleverse{2} But he that entereth in by the door
is the shepherd of the sheep. \bibleverse{3} To him the porter openeth;
and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and
leadeth them out. \bibleverse{4} And when he putteth forth his own
sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his
voice. \bibleverse{5} And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee
from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. \bibleverse{6} This
parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they
were which he spake unto them. \bibleverse{7} Then said Jesus unto them
again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep.
\bibleverse{8} All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but
the sheep did not hear them. \bibleverse{9} I am the door: by me if any
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find
pasture. \bibleverse{10} The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to
kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they
might have it more abundantly. \bibleverse{11} I am the good shepherd:
the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. \bibleverse{12} But he
that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not,
seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf
catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. \bibleverse{13} The hireling
fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep.
\bibleverse{14} I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known
of mine. \bibleverse{15} As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the
Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. \bibleverse{16} And other
sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.
\bibleverse{17} Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my
life, that I might take it again. \bibleverse{18} No man taketh it from
me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.

\bibleverse{19} There was a division therefore again among the Jews for
these sayings. \bibleverse{20} And many of them said, He hath a devil,
and is mad; why hear ye him? \bibleverse{21} Others said, These are not
the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the
blind?

\bibleverse{22} And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and
it was winter. \bibleverse{23} And Jesus walked in the temple in
Solomon's porch. \bibleverse{24} Then came the Jews round about him, and
said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the
Christ, tell us plainly. \bibleverse{25} Jesus answered them, I told
you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's name, they
bear witness of me. \bibleverse{26} But ye believe not, because ye are
not of my sheep, as I said unto you. \bibleverse{27} My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me: \bibleverse{28} And I give
unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my hand. \bibleverse{29} My Father, which gave
them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Father's hand. \bibleverse{30} I and my Father are one. \bibleverse{31}
Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. \bibleverse{32} Jesus
answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for
which of those works do ye stone me? \bibleverse{33} The Jews answered
him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and
because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. \bibleverse{34}
Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?
\bibleverse{35} If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came,
and the scripture cannot be broken; \bibleverse{36} Say ye of him, whom
the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest;
because I said, I am the Son of God? \bibleverse{37} If I do not the
works of my Father, believe me not. \bibleverse{38} But if I do, though
ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know, and believe,
that the Father is in me, and I in him. \bibleverse{39} Therefore they
sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their hand,
\bibleverse{40} And went away again beyond Jordan into the place where
John at first baptized; and there he abode. \bibleverse{41} And many
resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle: but all things that
John spake of this man were true. \bibleverse{42} And many believed on
him there.

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany,
the town of Mary and her sister Martha. \bibleverse{2} (It was that Mary
which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair,
whose brother Lazarus was sick.) \bibleverse{3} Therefore his sisters
sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.
\bibleverse{4} When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby. \bibleverse{5} Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and
Lazarus. \bibleverse{6} When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he
abode two days still in the same place where he was. \bibleverse{7} Then
after that saith he to his disciples, Let us go into Judæa again.
\bibleverse{8} His disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late
sought to stone thee; and goest thou thither again? \bibleverse{9} Jesus
answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the
day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world.
\bibleverse{10} But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because
there is no light in him. \bibleverse{11} These things said he: and
after that he saith unto them, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go,
that I may awake him out of sleep. \bibleverse{12} Then said his
disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. \bibleverse{13} Howbeit
Jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking
of rest in sleep. \bibleverse{14} Then said Jesus unto them plainly,
Lazarus is dead. \bibleverse{15} And I am glad for your sakes that I was
not there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto
him. \bibleverse{16} Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his
fellowdisciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.
\bibleverse{17} Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the
grave four days already. \bibleverse{18} Now Bethany was nigh unto
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off: \bibleverse{19} And many of the
Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother.
\bibleverse{20} Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming,
went and met him: but Mary sat still in the house. \bibleverse{21} Then
said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had
not died. \bibleverse{22} But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou
wilt ask of God, God will give it thee. \bibleverse{23} Jesus saith unto
her, Thy brother shall rise again. \bibleverse{24} Martha saith unto
him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last
day. \bibleverse{25} Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the
life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:
\bibleverse{26} And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never
die. Believest thou this? \bibleverse{27} She saith unto him, Yea, Lord:
I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come
into the world. \bibleverse{28} And when she had so said, she went her
way, and called Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Master is come,
and calleth for thee. \bibleverse{29} As soon as she heard that, she
arose quickly, and came unto him. \bibleverse{30} Now Jesus was not yet
come into the town, but was in that place where Martha met him.
\bibleverse{31} The Jews then which were with her in the house, and
comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went
out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there.
\bibleverse{32} Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him,
she fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been
here, my brother had not died. \bibleverse{33} When Jesus therefore saw
her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned
in the spirit, and was troubled, \bibleverse{34} And said, Where have ye
laid him? They said unto him, Lord, come and see. \bibleverse{35} Jesus
wept. \bibleverse{36} Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him!
\bibleverse{37} And some of them said, Could not this man, which opened
the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have
died? \bibleverse{38} Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh
to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. \bibleverse{39}
Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was
dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he hath been
dead four days. \bibleverse{40} Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto
thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of
God? \bibleverse{41} Then they took away the stone from the place where
the dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I
thank thee that thou hast heard me. \bibleverse{42} And I knew that thou
hearest me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it,
that they may believe that thou hast sent me. \bibleverse{43} And when
he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.
\bibleverse{44} And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot
with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus
saith unto them, Loose him, and let him go. \bibleverse{45} Then many of
the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus did,
believed on him. \bibleverse{46} But some of them went their ways to the
Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done.

\bibleverse{47} Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a
council, and said, What do we? for this man doeth many miracles.
\bibleverse{48} If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him:
and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.
\bibleverse{49} And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest
that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, \bibleverse{50}
Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for
the people, and that the whole nation perish not. \bibleverse{51} And
this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he
prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; \bibleverse{52} And
not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one
the children of God that were scattered abroad. \bibleverse{53} Then
from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death.
\bibleverse{54} Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews;
but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city
called Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples.

\bibleverse{55} And the Jews' passover was nigh at hand: and many went
out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify
themselves. \bibleverse{56} Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among
themselves, as they stood in the temple, What think ye, that he will not
come to the feast? \bibleverse{57} Now both the chief priests and the
Pharisees had given a commandment, that, if any man knew where he were,
he should shew it, that they might take him.

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany,
where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
\bibleverse{2} There they made him a supper; and Martha served: but
Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him. \bibleverse{3}
Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and
anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the
house was filled with the odour of the ointment. \bibleverse{4} Then
saith one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, which should
betray him, \bibleverse{5} Why was not this ointment sold for three
hundred pence, and given to the poor? \bibleverse{6} This he said, not
that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag,
and bare what was put therein. \bibleverse{7} Then said Jesus, Let her
alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this. \bibleverse{8}
For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.
\bibleverse{9} Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there:
and they came not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus
also, whom he had raised from the dead.

\bibleverse{10} But the chief priests consulted that they might put
Lazarus also to death; \bibleverse{11} Because that by reason of him
many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.

\bibleverse{12} On the next day much people that were come to the feast,
when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, \bibleverse{13} Took
branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna:
Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.
\bibleverse{14} And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon;
as it is written, \bibleverse{15} Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold,
thy King cometh, sitting on an ass's colt. \bibleverse{16} These things
understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that
they had done these things unto him. \bibleverse{17} The people
therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and
raised him from the dead, bare record. \bibleverse{18} For this cause
the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this
miracle. \bibleverse{19} The Pharisees therefore said among themselves,
Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.

\bibleverse{20} And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to
worship at the feast: \bibleverse{21} The same came therefore to Philip,
which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we
would see Jesus. \bibleverse{22} Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: and
again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.

\bibleverse{23} And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that
the Son of man should be glorified. \bibleverse{24} Verily, verily, I
say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it
abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.
\bibleverse{25} He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that
hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
\bibleverse{26} If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am,
there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father
honour. \bibleverse{27} Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say?
Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this
hour. \bibleverse{28} Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice
from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it
again. \bibleverse{29} The people therefore, that stood by, and heard
it, said that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to him.
\bibleverse{30} Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of
me, but for your sakes. \bibleverse{31} Now is the judgment of this
world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. \bibleverse{32}
And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.
\bibleverse{33} This he said, signifying what death he should die.
\bibleverse{34} The people answered him, We have heard out of the law
that Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man must
be lifted up? who is this Son of man? \bibleverse{35} Then Jesus said
unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have
the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in darkness
knoweth not whither he goeth. \bibleverse{36} While ye have light,
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things
spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.

\bibleverse{37} But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet
they believed not on him: \bibleverse{38} That the saying of Esaias the
prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our
report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?
\bibleverse{39} Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias
said again, \bibleverse{40} He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened
their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand
with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.
\bibleverse{41} These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and
spake of him.

\bibleverse{42} Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed
on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they
should be put out of the synagogue: \bibleverse{43} For they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God.

\bibleverse{44} Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth
not on me, but on him that sent me. \bibleverse{45} And he that seeth me
seeth him that sent me. \bibleverse{46} I am come a light into the
world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness.
\bibleverse{47} And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge
him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
\bibleverse{48} He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath
one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge
him in the last day. \bibleverse{49} For I have not spoken of myself;
but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should
say, and what I should speak. \bibleverse{50} And I know that his
commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as
the Father said unto me, so I speak.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew
that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the
Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto
the end. \bibleverse{2} And supper being ended, the devil having now put
into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him;
\bibleverse{3} Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into
his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God;
\bibleverse{4} He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and
took a towel, and girded himself. \bibleverse{5} After that he poureth
water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe
them with the towel wherewith he was girded. \bibleverse{6} Then cometh
he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my
feet? \bibleverse{7} Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou
knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter. \bibleverse{8} Peter
saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I
wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. \bibleverse{9} Simon Peter
saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.
\bibleverse{10} Jesus saith to him, He that is washed needeth not save
to wash his feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not
all. \bibleverse{11} For he knew who should betray him; therefore said
he, Ye are not all clean. \bibleverse{12} So after he had washed their
feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto
them, Know ye what I have done to you? \bibleverse{13} Ye call me Master
and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. \bibleverse{14} If I then, your
Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one
another's feet. \bibleverse{15} For I have given you an example, that ye
should do as I have done to you. \bibleverse{16} Verily, verily, I say
unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is
sent greater than he that sent him. \bibleverse{17} If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them.

\bibleverse{18} I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but
that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath
lifted up his heel against me. \bibleverse{19} Now I tell you before it
come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he.
\bibleverse{20} Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth
whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him
that sent me. \bibleverse{21} When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled
in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that
one of you shall betray me. \bibleverse{22} Then the disciples looked
one on another, doubting of whom he spake. \bibleverse{23} Now there was
leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved.
\bibleverse{24} Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should
ask who it should be of whom he spake. \bibleverse{25} He then lying on
Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it? \bibleverse{26} Jesus
answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it.
And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of
Simon. \bibleverse{27} And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then
said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly. \bibleverse{28} Now no
man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him.
\bibleverse{29} For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag,
that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have need of
against the feast; or, that he should give something to the poor.
\bibleverse{30} He then having received the sop went immediately out:
and it was night.

\bibleverse{31} Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the
Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. \bibleverse{32} If
God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and
shall straightway glorify him. \bibleverse{33} Little children, yet a
little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said unto the
Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you. \bibleverse{34}
A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another. \bibleverse{35} By this shall
all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.

\bibleverse{36} Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou?
Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow me afterwards. \bibleverse{37} Peter said unto him, Lord,
why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake.
\bibleverse{38} Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my
sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till
thou hast denied me thrice.

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me. \bibleverse{2} In my Father's house are many
mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a
place for you. \bibleverse{3} And if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye
may be also. \bibleverse{4} And whither I go ye know, and the way ye
know. \bibleverse{5} Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither
thou goest; and how can we know the way? \bibleverse{6} Jesus saith unto
him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the
Father, but by me. \bibleverse{7} If ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen
him. \bibleverse{8} Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and
it sufficeth us. \bibleverse{9} Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so
long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath
seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the
Father? \bibleverse{10} Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself:
but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. \bibleverse{11}
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else
believe me for the very works' sake. \bibleverse{12} Verily, verily, I
say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do
also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my
Father. \bibleverse{13} And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. \bibleverse{14}
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

\bibleverse{15} If ye love me, keep my commandments. \bibleverse{16} And
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever; \bibleverse{17} Even the Spirit of truth;
whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth
him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.
\bibleverse{18} I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.
\bibleverse{19} Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but
ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also. \bibleverse{20} At that
day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.
\bibleverse{21} He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is
that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I
will love him, and will manifest myself to him. \bibleverse{22} Judas
saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest
thyself unto us, and not unto the world? \bibleverse{23} Jesus answered
and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. \bibleverse{24} He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and
the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me.
\bibleverse{25} These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present
with you. \bibleverse{26} But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
\bibleverse{27} Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as
the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled,
neither let it be afraid. \bibleverse{28} Ye have heard how I said unto
you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would
rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater
than I. \bibleverse{29} And now I have told you before it come to pass,
that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe. \bibleverse{30}
Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world
cometh, and hath nothing in me. \bibleverse{31} But that the world may
know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even
so I do. Arise, let us go hence.

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
\bibleverse{2} Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away:
and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring
forth more fruit. \bibleverse{3} Now ye are clean through the word which
I have spoken unto you. \bibleverse{4} Abide in me, and I in you. As the
branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more
can ye, except ye abide in me. \bibleverse{5} I am the vine, ye are the
branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth
much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. \bibleverse{6} If a man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.
\bibleverse{7} If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. \bibleverse{8} Herein
is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my
disciples. \bibleverse{9} As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved
you: continue ye in my love. \bibleverse{10} If ye keep my commandments,
ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments,
and abide in his love. \bibleverse{11} These things have I spoken unto
you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.
\bibleverse{12} This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I
have loved you. \bibleverse{13} Greater love hath no man than this, that
a man lay down his life for his friends. \bibleverse{14} Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. \bibleverse{15} Henceforth I
call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth:
but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my
Father I have made known unto you. \bibleverse{16} Ye have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring
forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall
ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you. \bibleverse{17} These
things I command you, that ye love one another. \bibleverse{18} If the
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.
\bibleverse{19} If ye were of the world, the world would love his own:
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hateth you. \bibleverse{20} Remember the word
that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my
saying, they will keep yours also. \bibleverse{21} But all these things
will they do unto you for my name's sake, because they know not him that
sent me. \bibleverse{22} If I had not come and spoken unto them, they
had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin.
\bibleverse{23} He that hateth me hateth my Father also. \bibleverse{24}
If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they
had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my
Father. \bibleverse{25} But this cometh to pass, that the word might be
fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.
\bibleverse{26} But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the
Father, he shall testify of me: \bibleverse{27} And ye also shall bear
witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not
be offended. \bibleverse{2} They shall put you out of the synagogues:
yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he
doeth God service. \bibleverse{3} And these things will they do unto
you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. \bibleverse{4} But
these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you
at the beginning, because I was with you. \bibleverse{5} But now I go my
way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?
\bibleverse{6} But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow
hath filled your heart. \bibleverse{7} Nevertheless I tell you the
truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto
you. \bibleverse{8} And when he is come, he will reprove the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: \bibleverse{9} Of sin,
because they believe not on me; \bibleverse{10} Of righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; \bibleverse{11} Of
judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. \bibleverse{12} I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
\bibleverse{13} Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will
guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you
things to come. \bibleverse{14} He shall glorify me: for he shall
receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. \bibleverse{15} All things
that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of
mine, and shall shew it unto you. \bibleverse{16} A little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me,
because I go to the Father. \bibleverse{17} Then said some of his
disciples among themselves, What is this that he saith unto us, A little
while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall
see me: and, Because I go to the Father? \bibleverse{18} They said
therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? we cannot tell
what he saith. \bibleverse{19} Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to
ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among yourselves of that I
said, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little
while, and ye shall see me? \bibleverse{20} Verily, verily, I say unto
you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye
shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
\bibleverse{21} A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her
hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she
remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the
world. \bibleverse{22} And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see
you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from
you. \bibleverse{23} And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
he will give it you. \bibleverse{24} Hitherto have ye asked nothing in
my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.
\bibleverse{25} These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the
time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I
shall shew you plainly of the Father. \bibleverse{26} At that day ye
shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the
Father for you: \bibleverse{27} For the Father himself loveth you,
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.
\bibleverse{28} I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. \bibleverse{29}
His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest
no proverb. \bibleverse{30} Now are we sure that thou knowest all
things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe
that thou camest forth from God. \bibleverse{31} Jesus answered them, Do
ye now believe? \bibleverse{32} Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now
come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave
me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
\bibleverse{33} These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might
have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good
cheer; I have overcome the world.

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy
Son also may glorify thee: \bibleverse{2} As thou hast given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast
given him. \bibleverse{3} And this is life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.
\bibleverse{4} I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the
work which thou gavest me to do. \bibleverse{5} And now, O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee
before the world was. \bibleverse{6} I have manifested thy name unto the
men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou
gavest them me; and they have kept thy word. \bibleverse{7} Now they
have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee.
\bibleverse{8} For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest
me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out
from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.
\bibleverse{9} I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou hast given me; for they are thine. \bibleverse{10} And all
mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.
\bibleverse{11} And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the
world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name
those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.
\bibleverse{12} While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy
name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost,
but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.
\bibleverse{13} And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the
world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.
\bibleverse{14} I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated
them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
\bibleverse{15} I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the
world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. \bibleverse{16}
They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
\bibleverse{17} Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.
\bibleverse{18} As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also
sent them into the world. \bibleverse{19} And for their sakes I sanctify
myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.
\bibleverse{20} Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe on me through their word; \bibleverse{21} That they all
may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.
\bibleverse{22} And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them;
that they may be one, even as we are one: \bibleverse{23} I in them, and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may
know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.
\bibleverse{24} Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me,
be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast
given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
\bibleverse{25} O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I
have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.
\bibleverse{26} And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare
it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in
them.

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his
disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he
entered, and his disciples. \bibleverse{2} And Judas also, which
betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with
his disciples. \bibleverse{3} Judas then, having received a band of men
and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with
lanterns and torches and weapons. \bibleverse{4} Jesus therefore,
knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto
them, Whom seek ye? \bibleverse{5} They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus saith unto them, I am he. And Judas also, which betrayed him,
stood with them. \bibleverse{6} As soon then as he had said unto them, I
am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground. \bibleverse{7} Then
asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth.
\bibleverse{8} Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: if
therefore ye seek me, let these go their way: \bibleverse{9} That the
saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me
have I lost none. \bibleverse{10} Then Simon Peter having a sword drew
it, and smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The
servant's name was Malchus. \bibleverse{11} Then said Jesus unto Peter,
Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me,
shall I not drink it? \bibleverse{12} Then the band and the captain and
officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him, \bibleverse{13} And led
him away to Annas first; for he was father in law to Caiaphas, which was
the high priest that same year. \bibleverse{14} Now Caiaphas was he,
which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man
should die for the people.

\bibleverse{15} And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another
disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with
Jesus into the palace of the high priest. \bibleverse{16} But Peter
stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was
known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and
brought in Peter. \bibleverse{17} Then saith the damsel that kept the
door unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He
saith, I am not. \bibleverse{18} And the servants and officers stood
there, who had made a fire of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed
themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.

\bibleverse{19} The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and
of his doctrine. \bibleverse{20} Jesus answered him, I spake openly to
the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither
the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.
\bibleverse{21} Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have
said unto them: behold, they know what I said. \bibleverse{22} And when
he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with
the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?
\bibleverse{23} Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness
of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me? \bibleverse{24} Now Annas
had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest. \bibleverse{25} And
Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art
not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.
\bibleverse{26} One of the servants of the high priest, being his
kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden
with him? \bibleverse{27} Peter then denied again: and immediately the
cock crew.

\bibleverse{28} Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of
judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the
judgment hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the
passover. \bibleverse{29} Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What
accusation bring ye against this man? \bibleverse{30} They answered and
said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered
him up unto thee. \bibleverse{31} Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye
him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto
him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death: \bibleverse{32}
That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying
what death he should die. \bibleverse{33} Then Pilate entered into the
judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the
King of the Jews? \bibleverse{34} Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this
thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me? \bibleverse{35}
Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have
delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done? \bibleverse{36} Jesus
answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this
world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence. \bibleverse{37} Pilate
therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou
sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came
I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one
that is of the truth heareth my voice. \bibleverse{38} Pilate saith unto
him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto
the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all.
\bibleverse{39} But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one
at the passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of
the Jews? \bibleverse{40} Then cried they all again, saying, Not this
man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.
\bibleverse{2} And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on
his head, and they put on him a purple robe, \bibleverse{3} And said,
Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands.
\bibleverse{4} Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them,
Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault
in him. \bibleverse{5} Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of
thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man!
\bibleverse{6} When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him,
they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto
them, Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.
\bibleverse{7} The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

\bibleverse{8} When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more
afraid; \bibleverse{9} And went again into the judgment hall, and saith
unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.
\bibleverse{10} Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me?
knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to
release thee? \bibleverse{11} Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no
power at all against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore
he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin. \bibleverse{12} And
from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out,
saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cæsar's friend: whosoever
maketh himself a king speaketh against Cæsar.

\bibleverse{13} When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought
Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called
the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. \bibleverse{14} And it was
the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith
unto the Jews, Behold your King! \bibleverse{15} But they cried out,
Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall
I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but
Cæsar. \bibleverse{16} Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be
crucified. And they took Jesus, and led him away. \bibleverse{17} And he
bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place of a skull,
which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha: \bibleverse{18} Where they
crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in
the midst.

\bibleverse{19} And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And
the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. \bibleverse{20}
This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek,
and Latin. \bibleverse{21} Then said the chief priests of the Jews to
Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of
the Jews. \bibleverse{22} Pilate answered, What I have written I have
written.

\bibleverse{23} Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took
his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
\bibleverse{24} They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend
it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be
fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my
vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.

\bibleverse{25} Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and
his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
\bibleverse{26} When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple
standing by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy
son! \bibleverse{27} Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother!
And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

\bibleverse{28} After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.
\bibleverse{29} Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they
filled a spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his
mouth. \bibleverse{30} When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he
said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.
\bibleverse{31} The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that
the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for
that sabbath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might
be broken, and that they might be taken away. \bibleverse{32} Then came
the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which
was crucified with him. \bibleverse{33} But when they came to Jesus, and
saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: \bibleverse{34}
But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith
came there out blood and water. \bibleverse{35} And he that saw it bare
record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that
ye might believe. \bibleverse{36} For these things were done, that the
scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.
\bibleverse{37} And again another scripture saith, They shall look on
him whom they pierced.

\bibleverse{38} And after this Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might
take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave him leave. He came
therefore, and took the body of Jesus. \bibleverse{39} And there came
also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight.
\bibleverse{40} Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen
clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.
\bibleverse{41} Now in the place where he was crucified there was a
garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet
laid. \bibleverse{42} There laid they Jesus therefore because of the
Jews' preparation day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early,
when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away
from the sepulchre. \bibleverse{2} Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them,
They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not
where they have laid him. \bibleverse{3} Peter therefore went forth, and
that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre. \bibleverse{4} So they
ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came
first to the sepulchre. \bibleverse{5} And he stooping down, and looking
in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in. \bibleverse{6} Then
cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth
the linen clothes lie, \bibleverse{7} And the napkin, that was about his
head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place
by itself. \bibleverse{8} Then went in also that other disciple, which
came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, and believed. \bibleverse{9}
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the
dead. \bibleverse{10} Then the disciples went away again unto their own
home.

\bibleverse{11} But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as
she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre,
\bibleverse{12} And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the
head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
\bibleverse{13} And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She
saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not
where they have laid him. \bibleverse{14} And when she had thus said,
she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it
was Jesus. \bibleverse{15} Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest
thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith
unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast
laid him, and I will take him away. \bibleverse{16} Jesus saith unto
her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to
say, Master. \bibleverse{17} Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I
am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your
God. \bibleverse{18} Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she
had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.

\bibleverse{19} Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the
week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for
fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto
them, Peace be unto you. \bibleverse{20} And when he had so said, he
shewed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad,
when they saw the Lord. \bibleverse{21} Then said Jesus to them again,
Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.
\bibleverse{22} And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and
saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: \bibleverse{23} Whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained.

\bibleverse{24} But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not
with them when Jesus came. \bibleverse{25} The other disciples therefore
said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I
shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into
the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not
believe.

\bibleverse{26} And after eight days again his disciples were within,
and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood
in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. \bibleverse{27} Then saith he
to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach
hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but
believing. \bibleverse{28} And Thomas answered and said unto him, My
Lord and my God. \bibleverse{29} Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because
thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet have believed.

\bibleverse{30} And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of
his disciples, which are not written in this book: \bibleverse{31} But
these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name.

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the
disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he himself.
\bibleverse{2} There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called
Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and
two other of his disciples. \bibleverse{3} Simon Peter saith unto them,
I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went
forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught
nothing. \bibleverse{4} But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood
on the shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
\bibleverse{5} Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat?
They answered him, No.~\bibleverse{6} And he said unto them, Cast the
net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast
therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of
fishes. \bibleverse{7} Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith
unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the
Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did
cast himself into the sea. \bibleverse{8} And the other disciples came
in a little ship; (for they were not far from land, but as it were two
hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes. \bibleverse{9} As soon
then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish
laid thereon, and bread. \bibleverse{10} Jesus saith unto them, Bring of
the fish which ye have now caught. \bibleverse{11} Simon Peter went up,
and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and
three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.
\bibleverse{12} Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. And none of the
disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.
\bibleverse{13} Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them,
and fish likewise. \bibleverse{14} This is now the third time that Jesus
shewed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.

\bibleverse{15} So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him,
Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my
lambs. \bibleverse{16} He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son
of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest
that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep. \bibleverse{17} He
saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?
Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou
me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest
that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep. \bibleverse{18}
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst
thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old,
thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and
carry thee whither thou wouldest not. \bibleverse{19} This spake he,
signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken
this, he saith unto him, Follow me. \bibleverse{20} Then Peter, turning
about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned
on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth
thee? \bibleverse{21} Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what
shall this man do? \bibleverse{22} Jesus saith unto him, If I will that
he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.
\bibleverse{23} Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that
that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not
die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
\bibleverse{24} This is the disciple which testifieth of these things,
and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true.
\bibleverse{25} And there are also many other things which Jesus did,
the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.
