\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job.
That man was blameless and upright, and one who feared God,\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} and
turned away from evil. \bibleverse{2} There were born to him seven sons
and three daughters. \bibleverse{3} His possessions also were seven
thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five
hundred female donkeys, and a very great household; so that this man was
the greatest of all the children of the east. \bibleverse{4} His sons
went and held a feast in the house of each one on his birthday; and they
sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
\bibleverse{5} It was so, when the days of their feasting had run their
course, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them
all. For Job said, ``It may be that my sons have sinned, and renounced
God in their hearts.'' Job did so continually.

\bibleverse{6} Now on the day when God's sons came to present themselves
before Yahweh,\footnote{\textbf{1:6} ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name,
  sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}'' (all caps) in other translations.}
Satan also came among them. \bibleverse{7} Yahweh said to Satan, ``Where
have you come from?''

Then Satan answered Yahweh, and said, ``From going back and forth in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it.''

\bibleverse{8} Yahweh said to Satan, ``Have you considered my servant,
Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an
upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil.''

\bibleverse{9} Then Satan answered Yahweh, and said, ``Does Job fear God
for nothing? \bibleverse{10} Haven't you made a hedge around him, and
around his house, and around all that he has, on every side? You have
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the
land. \bibleverse{11} But stretch out your hand now, and touch all that
he has, and he will renounce you to your face.''

\bibleverse{12} Yahweh said to Satan, ``Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:12}
  ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} all
that he has is in your power. Only on himself don't stretch out your
hand.''

So Satan went out from the presence of Yahweh. \bibleverse{13} It fell
on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine
in their oldest brother's house, \bibleverse{14} that a messenger came
to Job, and said, ``The oxen were plowing, and the donkeys feeding
beside them, \bibleverse{15} and the Sabeans attacked, and took them
away. Yes, they have killed the servants with the edge of the sword, and
I alone have escaped to tell you.''

\bibleverse{16} While he was still speaking, another also came and said,
``The fire of God has fallen from the sky, and has burned up the sheep
and the servants, and consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell
you.''

\bibleverse{17} While he was still speaking, another also came and said,
``The Chaldeans made three bands, and swept down on the camels, and have
taken them away, yes, and killed the servants with the edge of the
sword; and I alone have escaped to tell you.''

\bibleverse{18} While he was still speaking, there came also another,
and said, ``Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine
in their oldest brother's house, \bibleverse{19} and behold, there came
a great wind from the wilderness, and struck the four corners of the
house, and it fell on the young men, and they are dead. I alone have
escaped to tell you.''

\bibleverse{20} Then Job arose, and tore his robe, and shaved his head,
and fell down on the ground, and worshiped. \bibleverse{21} He said,
``Naked I came out of my mother's womb, and naked will I return there.
Yahweh gave, and Yahweh has taken away. Blessed be Yahweh's name.''
\bibleverse{22} In all this, Job didn't sin, nor charge God with
wrongdoing.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} Again, on the day when God's sons came to present
themselves before Yahweh, Satan came also among them to present himself
before Yahweh. \bibleverse{2} Yahweh said to Satan, ``Where have you
come from?''

Satan answered Yahweh, and said, ``From going back and forth in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it.''

\bibleverse{3} Yahweh said to Satan, ``Have you considered my servant
Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an
upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil. He still
maintains his integrity, although you incited me against him, to ruin
him without cause.''

\bibleverse{4} Satan answered Yahweh, and said, ``Skin for skin. Yes,
all that a man has he will give for his life. \bibleverse{5} But stretch
out your hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
renounce you to your face.''

\bibleverse{6} Yahweh said to Satan, ``Behold, he is in your hand. Only
spare his life.''

\bibleverse{7} So Satan went out from the presence of Yahweh, and struck
Job with painful sores from the sole of his foot to his head.
\bibleverse{8} He took for himself a potsherd to scrape himself with,
and he sat among the ashes. \bibleverse{9} Then his wife said to him,
``Do you still maintain your integrity? Renounce God, and die.''

\bibleverse{10} But he said to her, ``You speak as one of the foolish
women would speak. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil?''

In all this Job didn't sin with his lips. \bibleverse{11} Now when Job's
three friends heard of all this evil that had come on him, they each
came from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and
Zophar the Naamathite; and they made an appointment together to come to
sympathize with him and to comfort him. \bibleverse{12} When they lifted
up their eyes from a distance, and didn't recognize him, they raised
their voices, and wept; and they each tore his robe, and sprinkled dust
on their heads toward the sky. \bibleverse{13} So they sat down with him
on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to
him, for they saw that his grief was very great.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed the day of
his birth. \bibleverse{2} Job answered: \bibleverse{3} ``Let the day
perish in which I was born, the night which said, `There is a boy
conceived.' \bibleverse{4} Let that day be darkness. Don't let God from
above seek for it, neither let the light shine on it. \bibleverse{5} Let
darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own. Let a cloud
dwell on it. Let all that makes the day black terrify it. \bibleverse{6}
As for that night, let thick darkness seize on it. Let it not rejoice
among the days of the year. Let it not come into the number of the
months. \bibleverse{7} Behold, let that night be barren. Let no joyful
voice come therein. \bibleverse{8} Let them curse it who curse the day,
who are ready to rouse up leviathan. \bibleverse{9} Let the stars of its
twilight be dark. Let it look for light, but have none, neither let it
see the eyelids of the morning, \bibleverse{10} because it didn't shut
up the doors of my mother's womb, nor did it hide trouble from my eyes.
\bibleverse{11} ``Why didn't I die from the womb? Why didn't I give up
the spirit when my mother bore me? \bibleverse{12} Why did the knees
receive me? Or why the breast, that I should nurse? \bibleverse{13} For
now I should have lain down and been quiet. I should have slept, then I
would have been at rest, \bibleverse{14} with kings and counselors of
the earth, who built up waste places for themselves; \bibleverse{15} or
with princes who had gold, who filled their houses with silver;
\bibleverse{16} or as a hidden untimely birth I had not been, as infants
who never saw light. \bibleverse{17} There the wicked cease from
troubling. There the weary are at rest. \bibleverse{18} There the
prisoners are at ease together. They don't hear the voice of the
taskmaster. \bibleverse{19} The small and the great are there. The
servant is free from his master. \bibleverse{20} ``Why is light given to
him who is in misery, life to the bitter in soul, \bibleverse{21} who
long for death, but it doesn't come; and dig for it more than for hidden
treasures, \bibleverse{22} who rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when
they can find the grave? \bibleverse{23} Why is light given to a man
whose way is hidden, whom God has hedged in? \bibleverse{24} For my
sighing comes before I eat. My groanings are poured out like water.
\bibleverse{25} For the thing which I fear comes on me, that which I am
afraid of comes to me. \bibleverse{26} I am not at ease, neither am I
quiet, neither do I have rest; but trouble comes.''

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, \bibleverse{2} ``If
someone ventures to talk with you, will you be grieved? But who can
withhold himself from speaking? \bibleverse{3} Behold, you have
instructed many, you have strengthened the weak hands. \bibleverse{4}
Your words have supported him who was falling, you have made the feeble
knees firm. \bibleverse{5} But now it has come to you, and you faint. It
touches you, and you are troubled. \bibleverse{6} Isn't your piety your
confidence? Isn't the integrity of your ways your hope? \bibleverse{7}
``Remember, now, whoever perished, being innocent? Or where were the
upright cut off? \bibleverse{8} According to what I have seen, those who
plow iniquity and sow trouble, reap the same. \bibleverse{9} By the
breath of God they perish. By the blast of his anger are they consumed.
\bibleverse{10} The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce
lion, the teeth of the young lions, are broken. \bibleverse{11} The old
lion perishes for lack of prey. The cubs of the lioness are scattered
abroad. \bibleverse{12} ``Now a thing was secretly brought to me. My ear
received a whisper of it. \bibleverse{13} In thoughts from the visions
of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, \bibleverse{14} fear came on
me, and trembling, which made all my bones shake. \bibleverse{15} Then a
spirit passed before my face. The hair of my flesh stood up.
\bibleverse{16} It stood still, but I couldn't discern its appearance. A
form was before my eyes. Silence, then I heard a voice, saying,
\bibleverse{17} `Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man be
more pure than his Maker? \bibleverse{18} Behold, he puts no trust in
his servants. He charges his angels with error. \bibleverse{19} How much
more those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust,
who are crushed before the moth! \bibleverse{20} Between morning and
evening they are destroyed. They perish forever without any regarding
it. \bibleverse{21} Isn't their tent cord plucked up within them? They
die, and that without wisdom.'

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Call now; is there any who will answer you? To which of
the holy ones will you turn? \bibleverse{2} For resentment kills the
foolish man, and jealousy kills the simple. \bibleverse{3} I have seen
the foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his habitation.
\bibleverse{4} His children are far from safety. They are crushed in the
gate. Neither is there any to deliver them, \bibleverse{5} whose harvest
the hungry eat up, and take it even out of the thorns. The snare gapes
for their substance. \bibleverse{6} For affliction doesn't come out of
the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground; \bibleverse{7}
but man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward. \bibleverse{8}
``But as for me, I would seek God. I would commit my cause to God,
\bibleverse{9} who does great things that can't be fathomed, marvelous
things without number; \bibleverse{10} who gives rain on the earth, and
sends waters on the fields; \bibleverse{11} so that he sets up on high
those who are low, those who mourn are exalted to safety.
\bibleverse{12} He frustrates the plans of the crafty, so that their
hands can't perform their enterprise. \bibleverse{13} He takes the wise
in their own craftiness; the counsel of the cunning is carried headlong.
\bibleverse{14} They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope at
noonday as in the night. \bibleverse{15} But he saves from the sword of
their mouth, even the needy from the hand of the mighty. \bibleverse{16}
So the poor has hope, and injustice shuts her mouth. \bibleverse{17}
``Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects. Therefore do not despise
the chastening of the Almighty. \bibleverse{18} For he wounds and binds
up. He injures and his hands make whole. \bibleverse{19} He will deliver
you in six troubles; yes, in seven no evil will touch you.
\bibleverse{20} In famine he will redeem you from death; in war, from
the power of the sword. \bibleverse{21} You will be hidden from the
scourge of the tongue, neither will you be afraid of destruction when it
comes. \bibleverse{22} You will laugh at destruction and famine, neither
will you be afraid of the animals of the earth. \bibleverse{23} For you
will be allied with the stones of the field. The animals of the field
will be at peace with you. \bibleverse{24} You will know that your tent
is in peace. You will visit your fold, and will miss nothing.
\bibleverse{25} You will know also that your offspring\footnote{\textbf{5:25}
  or, seed} will be great, your offspring as the grass of the earth.
\bibleverse{26} You will come to your grave in a full age, like a shock
of grain comes in its season. \bibleverse{27} Behold, we have researched
it. It is so. Hear it, and know it for your good.''

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Oh that my anguish
were weighed, and all my calamity laid in the balances! \bibleverse{3}
For now it would be heavier than the sand of the seas, therefore my
words have been rash. \bibleverse{4} For the arrows of the Almighty are
within me. My spirit drinks up their poison. The terrors of God set
themselves in array against me. \bibleverse{5} Does the wild donkey bray
when he has grass? Or does the ox low over his fodder? \bibleverse{6}
Can that which has no flavor be eaten without salt? Or is there any
taste in the white of an egg? \bibleverse{7} My soul refuses to touch
them. They are as loathsome food to me. \bibleverse{8} ``Oh that I might
have my request, that God would grant the thing that I long for,
\bibleverse{9} even that it would please God to crush me; that he would
let loose his hand, and cut me off! \bibleverse{10} Let it still be my
consolation, yes, let me exult in pain that doesn't spare, that I have
not denied the words of the Holy One. \bibleverse{11} What is my
strength, that I should wait? What is my end, that I should be patient?
\bibleverse{12} Is my strength the strength of stones? Or is my flesh of
bronze? \bibleverse{13} Isn't it that I have no help in me, that wisdom
is driven away from me? \bibleverse{14} ``To him who is ready to faint,
kindness should be shown from his friend; even to him who forsakes the
fear of the Almighty. \bibleverse{15} My brothers have dealt deceitfully
as a brook, as the channel of brooks that pass away; \bibleverse{16}
which are black by reason of the ice, in which the snow hides itself.
\bibleverse{17} In the dry season, they vanish. When it is hot, they are
consumed out of their place. \bibleverse{18} The caravans that travel
beside them turn away. They go up into the waste, and perish.
\bibleverse{19} The caravans of Tema looked. The companies of Sheba
waited for them. \bibleverse{20} They were distressed because they were
confident. They came there, and were confounded. \bibleverse{21} For now
you are nothing. You see a terror, and are afraid. \bibleverse{22} Did I
ever say, `Give to me?' or, `Offer a present for me from your
substance?' \bibleverse{23} or, `Deliver me from the adversary's hand?'
or, `Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors?' \bibleverse{24} ``Teach
me, and I will hold my peace. Cause me to understand my error.
\bibleverse{25} How forcible are words of uprightness! But your reproof,
what does it reprove? \bibleverse{26} Do you intend to reprove words,
since the speeches of one who is desperate are as wind? \bibleverse{27}
Yes, you would even cast lots for the fatherless, and make merchandise
of your friend. \bibleverse{28} Now therefore be pleased to look at me,
for surely I will not lie to your face. \bibleverse{29} Please return.
Let there be no injustice. Yes, return again. My cause is righteous.
\bibleverse{30} Is there injustice on my tongue? Can't my taste discern
mischievous things?

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Isn't a man forced to labor on earth? Aren't his days
like the days of a hired hand? \bibleverse{2} As a servant who earnestly
desires the shadow, as a hireling who looks for his wages,
\bibleverse{3} so I am made to possess months of misery, wearisome
nights are appointed to me. \bibleverse{4} When I lie down, I say, `When
will I arise, and the night be gone?' I toss and turn until the dawning
of the day. \bibleverse{5} My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of
dust. My skin closes up, and breaks out afresh. \bibleverse{6} My days
are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope.
\bibleverse{7} Oh remember that my life is a breath. My eye will no more
see good. \bibleverse{8} The eye of him who sees me will see me no more.
Your eyes will be on me, but I will not be. \bibleverse{9} As the cloud
is consumed and vanishes away, so he who goes down to Sheol\footnote{\textbf{7:9}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} will come up no more. \bibleverse{10}
He will return no more to his house, neither will his place know him any
more. \bibleverse{11} ``Therefore I will not keep silent. I will speak
in the anguish of my spirit. I will complain in the bitterness of my
soul. \bibleverse{12} Am I a sea, or a sea monster, that you put a guard
over me? \bibleverse{13} When I say, `My bed will comfort me. My couch
will ease my complaint,' \bibleverse{14} then you scare me with dreams
and terrify me through visions, \bibleverse{15} so that my soul chooses
strangling, death rather than my bones. \bibleverse{16} I loathe my
life. I don't want to live forever. Leave me alone, for my days are but
a breath. \bibleverse{17} What is man, that you should magnify him, that
you should set your mind on him, \bibleverse{18} that you should visit
him every morning, and test him every moment? \bibleverse{19} How long
will you not look away from me, nor leave me alone until I swallow down
my spittle? \bibleverse{20} If I have sinned, what do I do to you, you
watcher of men? Why have you set me as a mark for you, so that I am a
burden to myself? \bibleverse{21} Why do you not pardon my disobedience,
and take away my iniquity? For now will I lie down in the dust. You will
seek me diligently, but I will not be.''

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, \bibleverse{2} ``How
long will you speak these things? Shall the words of your mouth be a
mighty wind? \bibleverse{3} Does God pervert justice? Or does the
Almighty pervert righteousness? \bibleverse{4} If your children have
sinned against him, he has delivered them into the hand of their
disobedience. \bibleverse{5} If you want to seek God diligently, make
your supplication to the Almighty. \bibleverse{6} If you were pure and
upright, surely now he would awaken for you, and make the habitation of
your righteousness prosperous. \bibleverse{7} Though your beginning was
small, yet your latter end would greatly increase. \bibleverse{8}
``Please inquire of past generations. Find out about the learning of
their fathers. \bibleverse{9} (For we are but of yesterday, and know
nothing, because our days on earth are a shadow.) \bibleverse{10} Shall
they not teach you, tell you, and utter words out of their heart?
\bibleverse{11} ``Can the papyrus grow up without mire? Can the rushes
grow without water? \bibleverse{12} While it is yet in its greenness,
not cut down, it withers before any other reed. \bibleverse{13} So are
the paths of all who forget God. The hope of the godless man will
perish, \bibleverse{14} whose confidence will break apart, whose trust
is a spider's web. \bibleverse{15} He will lean on his house, but it
will not stand. He will cling to it, but it will not endure.
\bibleverse{16} He is green before the sun. His shoots go out along his
garden. \bibleverse{17} His roots are wrapped around the rock pile. He
sees the place of stones. \bibleverse{18} If he is destroyed from his
place, then it will deny him, saying, `I have not seen you.'
\bibleverse{19} Behold, this is the joy of his way. Out of the earth,
others will spring. \bibleverse{20} ``Behold, God will not cast away a
blameless man, neither will he uphold the evildoers. \bibleverse{21} He
will still fill your mouth with laughter, your lips with shouting.
\bibleverse{22} Those who hate you will be clothed with shame. The tent
of the wicked will be no more.''

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Truly I know that it
is so, but how can man be just with God? \bibleverse{3} If he is pleased
to contend with him, he can't answer him one time in a thousand.
\bibleverse{4} God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Who has
hardened himself against him and prospered? \bibleverse{5} He removes
the mountains, and they don't know it, when he overturns them in his
anger. \bibleverse{6} He shakes the earth out of its place. Its pillars
tremble. \bibleverse{7} He commands the sun and it doesn't rise, and
seals up the stars. \bibleverse{8} He alone stretches out the heavens,
and treads on the waves of the sea. \bibleverse{9} He makes the Bear,
Orion, and the Pleiades, and the rooms of the south. \bibleverse{10} He
does great things past finding out; yes, marvelous things without
number. \bibleverse{11} Behold, he goes by me, and I don't see him. He
passes on also, but I don't perceive him. \bibleverse{12} Behold, he
snatches away. Who can hinder him? Who will ask him, `What are you
doing?' \bibleverse{13} ``God will not withdraw his anger. The helpers
of Rahab stoop under him. \bibleverse{14} How much less will I answer
him, and choose my words to argue with him? \bibleverse{15} Though I
were righteous, yet I wouldn't answer him. I would make supplication to
my judge. \bibleverse{16} If I had called, and he had answered me, yet I
wouldn't believe that he listened to my voice. \bibleverse{17} For he
breaks me with a storm, and multiplies my wounds without cause.
\bibleverse{18} He will not allow me to catch my breath, but fills me
with bitterness. \bibleverse{19} If it is a matter of strength, behold,
he is mighty! If of justice, `Who,' says he, `will summon me?'
\bibleverse{20} Though I am righteous, my own mouth will condemn me.
Though I am blameless, it will prove me perverse. \bibleverse{21} I am
blameless. I don't respect myself. I despise my life. \bibleverse{22}
``It is all the same. Therefore I say he destroys the blameless and the
wicked. \bibleverse{23} If the scourge kills suddenly, he will mock at
the trial of the innocent. \bibleverse{24} The earth is given into the
hand of the wicked. He covers the faces of its judges. If not he, then
who is it? \bibleverse{25} ``Now my days are swifter than a runner. They
flee away. They see no good. \bibleverse{26} They have passed away as
the swift ships, as the eagle that swoops on the prey. \bibleverse{27}
If I say, `I will forget my complaint, I will put off my sad face, and
cheer up,' \bibleverse{28} I am afraid of all my sorrows. I know that
you will not hold me innocent. \bibleverse{29} I will be condemned. Why
then do I labor in vain? \bibleverse{30} If I wash myself with snow, and
cleanse my hands with lye, \bibleverse{31} yet you will plunge me in the
ditch. My own clothes will abhor me. \bibleverse{32} For he is not a
man, as I am, that I should answer him, that we should come together in
judgment. \bibleverse{33} There is no umpire between us, that might lay
his hand on us both. \bibleverse{34} Let him take his rod away from me.
Let his terror not make me afraid; \bibleverse{35} then I would speak,
and not fear him, for I am not so in myself.

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} ``My soul is weary of my life. I will give free course to
my complaint. I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. \bibleverse{2}
I will tell God, `Do not condemn me. Show me why you contend with me.
\bibleverse{3} Is it good to you that you should oppress, that you
should despise the work of your hands, and smile on the counsel of the
wicked? \bibleverse{4} Do you have eyes of flesh? Or do you see as man
sees? \bibleverse{5} Are your days as the days of mortals, or your years
as man's years, \bibleverse{6} that you inquire after my iniquity, and
search after my sin? \bibleverse{7} Although you know that I am not
wicked, there is no one who can deliver out of your hand. \bibleverse{8}
``\,`Your hands have framed me and fashioned me altogether, yet you
destroy me. \bibleverse{9} Remember, I beg you, that you have fashioned
me as clay. Will you bring me into dust again? \bibleverse{10} Haven't
you poured me out like milk, and curdled me like cheese? \bibleverse{11}
You have clothed me with skin and flesh, and knit me together with bones
and sinews. \bibleverse{12} You have granted me life and loving
kindness. Your visitation has preserved my spirit. \bibleverse{13} Yet
you hid these things in your heart. I know that this is with you:
\bibleverse{14} if I sin, then you mark me. You will not acquit me from
my iniquity. \bibleverse{15} If I am wicked, woe to me. If I am
righteous, I still will not lift up my head, being filled with disgrace,
and conscious of my affliction. \bibleverse{16} If my head is held high,
you hunt me like a lion. Again you show yourself powerful to me.
\bibleverse{17} You renew your witnesses against me, and increase your
indignation on me. Changes and warfare are with me. \bibleverse{18}
``\,`Why, then, have you brought me out of the womb? I wish I had given
up the spirit, and no eye had seen me. \bibleverse{19} I should have
been as though I had not been. I should have been carried from the womb
to the grave. \bibleverse{20} Aren't my days few? Stop! Leave me alone,
that I may find a little comfort, \bibleverse{21} before I go where I
will not return from, to the land of darkness and of the shadow of
death; \bibleverse{22} the land dark as midnight, of the shadow of
death, without any order, where the light is as midnight.'\,''

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Zophar, the Naamathite, answered, \bibleverse{2}
``Shouldn't the multitude of words be answered? Should a man full of
talk be justified? \bibleverse{3} Should your boastings make men hold
their peace? When you mock, will no man make you ashamed? \bibleverse{4}
For you say, `My doctrine is pure. I am clean in your eyes.'
\bibleverse{5} But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against
you, \bibleverse{6} that he would show you the secrets of wisdom! For
true wisdom has two sides. Know therefore that God exacts of you less
than your iniquity deserves. \bibleverse{7} ``Can you fathom the mystery
of God? Or can you probe the limits of the Almighty? \bibleverse{8} They
are high as heaven. What can you do? They are deeper than
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{11:8} Sheol is the place of the dead.} What can
you know? \bibleverse{9} Its measure is longer than the earth, and
broader than the sea. \bibleverse{10} If he passes by, or confines, or
convenes a court, then who can oppose him? \bibleverse{11} For he knows
false men. He sees iniquity also, even though he doesn't consider it.
\bibleverse{12} An empty-headed man becomes wise when a man is born as a
wild donkey's colt. \bibleverse{13} ``If you set your heart aright,
stretch out your hands toward him. \bibleverse{14} If iniquity is in
your hand, put it far away. Don't let unrighteousness dwell in your
tents. \bibleverse{15} Surely then you will lift up your face without
spot. Yes, you will be steadfast, and will not fear, \bibleverse{16} for
you will forget your misery. You will remember it like waters that have
passed away. \bibleverse{17} Life will be clearer than the noonday.
Though there is darkness, it will be as the morning. \bibleverse{18} You
will be secure, because there is hope. Yes, you will search, and will
take your rest in safety. \bibleverse{19} Also you will lie down, and no
one will make you afraid. Yes, many will court your favor.
\bibleverse{20} But the eyes of the wicked will fail. They will have no
way to flee. Their hope will be the giving up of the spirit.''

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``No doubt, but you are
the people, and wisdom will die with you. \bibleverse{3} But I have
understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you. Yes, who doesn't
know such things as these? \bibleverse{4} I am like one who is a joke to
his neighbor, I, who called on God, and he answered. The just, the
blameless man is a joke. \bibleverse{5} In the thought of him who is at
ease there is contempt for misfortune. It is ready for them whose foot
slips. \bibleverse{6} The tents of robbers prosper. Those who provoke
God are secure, who carry their god in their hands. \bibleverse{7} ``But
ask the animals now, and they will teach you; the birds of the sky, and
they will tell you. \bibleverse{8} Or speak to the earth, and it will
teach you. The fish of the sea will declare to you. \bibleverse{9} Who
doesn't know that in all these, Yahweh's hand has done this,
\bibleverse{10} in whose hand is the life of every living thing, and the
breath of all mankind? \bibleverse{11} Doesn't the ear try words, even
as the palate tastes its food? \bibleverse{12} With aged men is wisdom,
in length of days understanding. \bibleverse{13} ``With God is wisdom
and might. He has counsel and understanding. \bibleverse{14} Behold, he
breaks down, and it can't be built again. He imprisons a man, and there
can be no release. \bibleverse{15} Behold, he withholds the waters, and
they dry up. Again, he sends them out, and they overturn the earth.
\bibleverse{16} With him is strength and wisdom. The deceived and the
deceiver are his. \bibleverse{17} He leads counselors away stripped. He
makes judges fools. \bibleverse{18} He loosens the bond of kings. He
binds their waist with a belt. \bibleverse{19} He leads priests away
stripped, and overthrows the mighty. \bibleverse{20} He removes the
speech of those who are trusted, and takes away the understanding of the
elders. \bibleverse{21} He pours contempt on princes, and loosens the
belt of the strong. \bibleverse{22} He uncovers deep things out of
darkness, and brings out to light the shadow of death. \bibleverse{23}
He increases the nations, and he destroys them. He enlarges the nations,
and he leads them captive. \bibleverse{24} He takes away understanding
from the chiefs of the people of the earth, and causes them to wander in
a wilderness where there is no way. \bibleverse{25} They grope in the
dark without light. He makes them stagger like a drunken man.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Behold, my eye has seen all this. My ear has heard and
understood it. \bibleverse{2} What you know, I know also. I am not
inferior to you. \bibleverse{3} ``Surely I would speak to the Almighty.
I desire to reason with God. \bibleverse{4} But you are forgers of lies.
You are all physicians of no value. \bibleverse{5} Oh that you would be
completely silent! Then you would be wise. \bibleverse{6} Hear now my
reasoning. Listen to the pleadings of my lips. \bibleverse{7} Will you
speak unrighteously for God, and talk deceitfully for him?
\bibleverse{8} Will you show partiality to him? Will you contend for
God? \bibleverse{9} Is it good that he should search you out? Or as one
deceives a man, will you deceive him? \bibleverse{10} He will surely
reprove you if you secretly show partiality. \bibleverse{11} Won't his
majesty make you afraid and his dread fall on you? \bibleverse{12} Your
memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes. Your defenses are defenses of
clay. \bibleverse{13} ``Be silent! Leave me alone, that I may speak. Let
come on me what will. \bibleverse{14} Why should I take my flesh in my
teeth, and put my life in my hand? \bibleverse{15} Behold, he will kill
me. I have no hope. Nevertheless, I will maintain my ways before him.
\bibleverse{16} This also will be my salvation, that a godless man will
not come before him. \bibleverse{17} Listen carefully to my speech. Let
my declaration be in your ears. \bibleverse{18} See now, I have set my
cause in order. I know that I am righteous. \bibleverse{19} Who is he
who will contend with me? For then would I hold my peace and give up the
spirit. \bibleverse{20} ``Only don't do two things to me, then I will
not hide myself from your face: \bibleverse{21} withdraw your hand far
from me, and don't let your terror make me afraid. \bibleverse{22} Then
call, and I will answer, or let me speak, and you answer me.
\bibleverse{23} How many are my iniquities and sins? Make me know my
disobedience and my sin. \bibleverse{24} Why do you hide your face, and
consider me your enemy? \bibleverse{25} Will you harass a driven leaf?
Will you pursue the dry stubble? \bibleverse{26} For you write bitter
things against me, and make me inherit the iniquities of my youth.
\bibleverse{27} You also put my feet in the stocks, and mark all my
paths. You set a bound to the soles of my feet, \bibleverse{28} though I
am decaying like a rotten thing, like a garment that is moth-eaten.

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Man, who is born of a woman, is of few days, and full
of trouble. \bibleverse{2} He grows up like a flower, and is cut down.
He also flees like a shadow, and doesn't continue. \bibleverse{3} Do you
open your eyes on such a one, and bring me into judgment with you?
\bibleverse{4} Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.
\bibleverse{5} Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months
is with you, and you have appointed his bounds that he can't pass.
\bibleverse{6} Look away from him, that he may rest, until he
accomplishes, as a hireling, his day. \bibleverse{7} ``For there is hope
for a tree if it is cut down, that it will sprout again, that the tender
branch of it will not cease. \bibleverse{8} Though its root grows old in
the earth, and its stock dies in the ground, \bibleverse{9} yet through
the scent of water it will bud, and sprout boughs like a plant.
\bibleverse{10} But man dies, and is laid low. Yes, man gives up the
spirit, and where is he? \bibleverse{11} As the waters fail from the
sea, and the river wastes and dries up, \bibleverse{12} so man lies down
and doesn't rise. Until the heavens are no more, they will not awake,
nor be roused out of their sleep. \bibleverse{13} ``Oh that you would
hide me in Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{14:13} Sheol is the place of the
  dead.} that you would keep me secret until your wrath is past, that
you would appoint me a set time and remember me! \bibleverse{14} If a
man dies, will he live again? I would wait all the days of my warfare,
until my release should come. \bibleverse{15} You would call, and I
would answer you. You would have a desire for the work of your hands.
\bibleverse{16} But now you count my steps. Don't you watch over my sin?
\bibleverse{17} My disobedience is sealed up in a bag. You fasten up my
iniquity. \bibleverse{18} ``But the mountain falling comes to nothing.
The rock is removed out of its place. \bibleverse{19} The waters wear
the stones. The torrents of it wash away the dust of the earth. So you
destroy the hope of man. \bibleverse{20} You forever prevail against
him, and he departs. You change his face, and send him away.
\bibleverse{21} His sons come to honor, and he doesn't know it. They are
brought low, but he doesn't perceive it of them. \bibleverse{22} But his
flesh on him has pain, and his soul within him mourns.''

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, \bibleverse{2}
``Should a wise man answer with vain knowledge, and fill himself with
the east wind? \bibleverse{3} Should he reason with unprofitable talk,
or with speeches with which he can do no good? \bibleverse{4} Yes, you
do away with fear, and hinder devotion before God. \bibleverse{5} For
your iniquity teaches your mouth, and you choose the language of the
crafty. \bibleverse{6} Your own mouth condemns you, and not I. Yes, your
own lips testify against you. \bibleverse{7} ``Are you the first man who
was born? Or were you brought out before the hills? \bibleverse{8} Have
you heard the secret counsel of God? Do you limit wisdom to yourself?
\bibleverse{9} What do you know that we don't know? What do you
understand which is not in us? \bibleverse{10} With us are both the
gray-headed and the very aged men, much older than your father.
\bibleverse{11} Are the consolations of God too small for you, even the
word that is gentle toward you? \bibleverse{12} Why does your heart
carry you away? Why do your eyes flash, \bibleverse{13} that you turn
your spirit against God, and let such words go out of your mouth?
\bibleverse{14} What is man, that he should be clean? What is he who is
born of a woman, that he should be righteous? \bibleverse{15} Behold, he
puts no trust in his holy ones. Yes, the heavens are not clean in his
sight; \bibleverse{16} how much less one who is abominable and corrupt,
a man who drinks iniquity like water! \bibleverse{17} ``I will show you,
listen to me; that which I have seen I will declare \bibleverse{18}
(which wise men have told by their fathers, and have not hidden it;
\bibleverse{19} to whom alone the land was given, and no stranger passed
among them): \bibleverse{20} the wicked man writhes in pain all his
days, even the number of years that are laid up for the oppressor.
\bibleverse{21} A sound of terrors is in his ears. In prosperity the
destroyer will come on him. \bibleverse{22} He doesn't believe that he
will return out of darkness. He is waited for by the sword.
\bibleverse{23} He wanders abroad for bread, saying, `Where is it?' He
knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand. \bibleverse{24}
Distress and anguish make him afraid. They prevail against him, as a
king ready to the battle. \bibleverse{25} Because he has stretched out
his hand against God, and behaves himself proudly against the Almighty,
\bibleverse{26} he runs at him with a stiff neck, with the thick shields
of his bucklers, \bibleverse{27} because he has covered his face with
his fatness, and gathered fat on his thighs. \bibleverse{28} He has
lived in desolate cities, in houses which no one inhabited, which were
ready to become heaps. \bibleverse{29} He will not be rich, neither will
his substance continue, neither will their possessions be extended on
the earth. \bibleverse{30} He will not depart out of darkness. The flame
will dry up his branches. He will go away by the breath of God's mouth.
\bibleverse{31} Let him not trust in emptiness, deceiving himself, for
emptiness will be his reward. \bibleverse{32} It will be accomplished
before his time. His branch will not be green. \bibleverse{33} He will
shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and will cast off his flower as
the olive tree. \bibleverse{34} For the company of the godless will be
barren, and fire will consume the tents of bribery. \bibleverse{35} They
conceive mischief and produce iniquity. Their heart prepares deceit.''

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``I have heard many
such things. You are all miserable comforters! \bibleverse{3} Shall vain
words have an end? Or what provokes you that you answer? \bibleverse{4}
I also could speak as you do. If your soul were in my soul's place, I
could join words together against you, and shake my head at you,
\bibleverse{5} but I would strengthen you with my mouth. The solace of
my lips would relieve you. \bibleverse{6} ``Though I speak, my grief is
not subsided. Though I forbear, what am I eased? \bibleverse{7} But now,
God, you have surely worn me out. You have made all my company desolate.
\bibleverse{8} You have shriveled me up. This is a witness against me.
My leanness rises up against me. It testifies to my face. \bibleverse{9}
He has torn me in his wrath and persecuted me. He has gnashed on me with
his teeth. My adversary sharpens his eyes on me. \bibleverse{10} They
have gaped on me with their mouth. They have struck me on the cheek
reproachfully. They gather themselves together against me.
\bibleverse{11} God delivers me to the ungodly, and casts me into the
hands of the wicked. \bibleverse{12} I was at ease, and he broke me
apart. Yes, he has taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces. He has
also set me up for his target. \bibleverse{13} His archers surround me.
He splits my kidneys apart, and does not spare. He pours out my bile on
the ground. \bibleverse{14} He breaks me with breach on breach. He runs
at me like a giant. \bibleverse{15} I have sewed sackcloth on my skin,
and have thrust my horn in the dust. \bibleverse{16} My face is red with
weeping. Deep darkness is on my eyelids, \bibleverse{17} although there
is no violence in my hands, and my prayer is pure. \bibleverse{18}
``Earth, don't cover my blood. Let my cry have no place to rest.
\bibleverse{19} Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven. He who
vouches for me is on high. \bibleverse{20} My friends scoff at me. My
eyes pour out tears to God, \bibleverse{21} that he would maintain the
right of a man with God, of a son of man with his neighbor!
\bibleverse{22} For when a few years have come, I will go the way of no
return.

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} ``My spirit is consumed. My days are extinct and the
grave is ready for me. \bibleverse{2} Surely there are mockers with me.
My eye dwells on their provocation. \bibleverse{3} ``Now give a pledge.
Be collateral for me with yourself. Who is there who will strike hands
with me? \bibleverse{4} For you have hidden their heart from
understanding, therefore you will not exalt them. \bibleverse{5} He who
denounces his friends for plunder, even the eyes of his children will
fail. \bibleverse{6} ``But he has made me a byword of the people. They
spit in my face. \bibleverse{7} My eye also is dim by reason of sorrow.
All my members are as a shadow. \bibleverse{8} Upright men will be
astonished at this. The innocent will stir himself up against the
godless. \bibleverse{9} Yet the righteous will hold to his way. He who
has clean hands will grow stronger and stronger. \bibleverse{10} But as
for you all, come back. I will not find a wise man among you.
\bibleverse{11} My days are past. My plans are broken off, as are the
thoughts of my heart. \bibleverse{12} They change the night into day,
saying `The light is near' in the presence of darkness. \bibleverse{13}
If I look for Sheol\footnote{\textbf{17:13} Sheol is the place of the
  dead.} as my house, if I have spread my couch in the darkness,
\bibleverse{14} if I have said to corruption, `You are my father,' and
to the worm, `My mother,' and `My sister,' \bibleverse{15} where then is
my hope? As for my hope, who will see it? \bibleverse{16} Shall it go
down with me to the gates of Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{17:16} Sheol is the
  place of the dead.} or descend together into the dust?''

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, \bibleverse{2} ``How
long will you hunt for words? Consider, and afterwards we will speak.
\bibleverse{3} Why are we counted as animals, which have become unclean
in your sight? \bibleverse{4} You who tear yourself in your anger, will
the earth be forsaken for you? Or will the rock be removed out of its
place? \bibleverse{5} ``Yes, the light of the wicked will be put out.
The spark of his fire won't shine. \bibleverse{6} The light will be dark
in his tent. His lamp above him will be put out. \bibleverse{7} The
steps of his strength will be shortened. His own counsel will cast him
down. \bibleverse{8} For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he
wanders into its mesh. \bibleverse{9} A snare will take him by the heel.
A trap will catch him. \bibleverse{10} A noose is hidden for him in the
ground, a trap for him on the path. \bibleverse{11} Terrors will make
him afraid on every side, and will chase him at his heels.
\bibleverse{12} His strength will be famished. Calamity will be ready at
his side. \bibleverse{13} The members of his body will be devoured. The
firstborn of death will devour his members. \bibleverse{14} He will be
rooted out of the security of his tent. He will be brought to the king
of terrors. \bibleverse{15} There will dwell in his tent that which is
none of his. Sulfur will be scattered on his habitation. \bibleverse{16}
His roots will be dried up beneath. His branch will be cut off above.
\bibleverse{17} His memory will perish from the earth. He will have no
name in the street. \bibleverse{18} He will be driven from light into
darkness, and chased out of the world. \bibleverse{19} He will have
neither son nor grandson among his people, nor any remaining where he
lived. \bibleverse{20} Those who come after will be astonished at his
day, as those who went before were frightened. \bibleverse{21} Surely
such are the dwellings of the unrighteous. This is the place of him who
doesn't know God.''

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``How long will you
torment me, and crush me with words? \bibleverse{3} You have reproached
me ten times. You aren't ashamed that you attack me. \bibleverse{4} If
it is true that I have erred, my error remains with myself.
\bibleverse{5} If indeed you will magnify yourselves against me, and
plead against me my reproach, \bibleverse{6} know now that God has
subverted me, and has surrounded me with his net. \bibleverse{7}
``Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard. I cry for help, but
there is no justice. \bibleverse{8} He has walled up my way so that I
can't pass, and has set darkness in my paths. \bibleverse{9} He has
stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head.
\bibleverse{10} He has broken me down on every side, and I am gone. He
has plucked my hope up like a tree. \bibleverse{11} He has also kindled
his wrath against me. He counts me among his adversaries.
\bibleverse{12} His troops come on together, build a siege ramp against
me, and encamp around my tent. \bibleverse{13} ``He has put my brothers
far from me. My acquaintances are wholly estranged from me.
\bibleverse{14} My relatives have gone away. My familiar friends have
forgotten me. \bibleverse{15} Those who dwell in my house and my maids
consider me a stranger. I am an alien in their sight. \bibleverse{16} I
call to my servant, and he gives me no answer. I beg him with my mouth.
\bibleverse{17} My breath is offensive to my wife. I am loathsome to the
children of my own mother. \bibleverse{18} Even young children despise
me. If I arise, they speak against me. \bibleverse{19} All my familiar
friends abhor me. They whom I loved have turned against me.
\bibleverse{20} My bones stick to my skin and to my flesh. I have
escaped by the skin of my teeth. \bibleverse{21} ``Have pity on me. Have
pity on me, you my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
\bibleverse{22} Why do you persecute me as God, and are not satisfied
with my flesh? \bibleverse{23} ``Oh that my words were now written! Oh
that they were inscribed in a book! \bibleverse{24} That with an iron
pen and lead they were engraved in the rock forever! \bibleverse{25} But
as for me, I know that my Redeemer lives. In the end, he will stand upon
the earth. \bibleverse{26} After my skin is destroyed, then I will see
God in my flesh, \bibleverse{27} whom I, even I, will see on my side. My
eyes will see, and not as a stranger. ``My heart is consumed within me.
\bibleverse{28} If you say, `How we will persecute him!' because the
root of the matter is found in me, \bibleverse{29} be afraid of the
sword, for wrath brings the punishments of the sword, that you may know
there is a judgment.''

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Zophar the Naamathite answered, \bibleverse{2}
``Therefore my thoughts answer me, even by reason of my haste that is in
me. \bibleverse{3} I have heard the reproof which puts me to shame. The
spirit of my understanding answers me. \bibleverse{4} Don't you know
this from old time, since man was placed on earth, \bibleverse{5} that
the triumphing of the wicked is short, the joy of the godless but for a
moment? \bibleverse{6} Though his height mount up to the heavens, and
his head reach to the clouds, \bibleverse{7} yet he will perish forever
like his own dung. Those who have seen him will say, `Where is he?'
\bibleverse{8} He will fly away as a dream, and will not be found. Yes,
he will be chased away like a vision of the night. \bibleverse{9} The
eye which saw him will see him no more, neither will his place see him
any more. \bibleverse{10} His children will seek the favor of the poor.
His hands will give back his wealth. \bibleverse{11} His bones are full
of his youth, but youth will lie down with him in the dust.
\bibleverse{12} ``Though wickedness is sweet in his mouth, though he
hide it under his tongue, \bibleverse{13} though he spare it, and will
not let it go, but keep it still within his mouth, \bibleverse{14} yet
his food in his bowels is turned. It is cobra venom within him.
\bibleverse{15} He has swallowed down riches, and he will vomit them up
again. God will cast them out of his belly. \bibleverse{16} He will suck
cobra venom. The viper's tongue will kill him. \bibleverse{17} He will
not look at the rivers, the flowing streams of honey and butter.
\bibleverse{18} He will restore that for which he labored, and will not
swallow it down. He will not rejoice according to the substance that he
has gotten. \bibleverse{19} For he has oppressed and forsaken the poor.
He has violently taken away a house, and he will not build it up.
\bibleverse{20} ``Because he knew no quietness within him, he will not
save anything of that in which he delights. \bibleverse{21} There was
nothing left that he didn't devour, therefore his prosperity will not
endure. \bibleverse{22} In the fullness of his sufficiency, distress
will overtake him. The hand of everyone who is in misery will come on
him. \bibleverse{23} When he is about to fill his belly, God will cast
the fierceness of his wrath on him. It will rain on him while he is
eating. \bibleverse{24} He will flee from the iron weapon. The bronze
arrow will strike him through. \bibleverse{25} He draws it out, and it
comes out of his body. Yes, the glittering point comes out of his liver.
Terrors are on him. \bibleverse{26} All darkness is laid up for his
treasures. An unfanned fire will devour him. It will consume that which
is left in his tent. \bibleverse{27} The heavens will reveal his
iniquity. The earth will rise up against him. \bibleverse{28} The
increase of his house will depart. They will rush away in the day of his
wrath. \bibleverse{29} This is the portion of a wicked man from God, the
heritage appointed to him by God.''

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Listen diligently to
my speech. Let this be your consolation. \bibleverse{3} Allow me, and I
also will speak. After I have spoken, mock on. \bibleverse{4} As for me,
is my complaint to man? Why shouldn't I be impatient? \bibleverse{5}
Look at me, and be astonished. Lay your hand on your mouth.
\bibleverse{6} When I remember, I am troubled. Horror takes hold of my
flesh. \bibleverse{7} ``Why do the wicked live, become old, yes, and
grow mighty in power? \bibleverse{8} Their child is established with
them in their sight, their offspring before their eyes. \bibleverse{9}
Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.
\bibleverse{10} Their bulls breed without fail. Their cows calve, and
don't miscarry. \bibleverse{11} They send out their little ones like a
flock. Their children dance. \bibleverse{12} They sing to the tambourine
and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the pipe. \bibleverse{13} They
spend their days in prosperity. In an instant they go down to
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{21:13} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
\bibleverse{14} They tell God, `Depart from us, for we don't want to
know about your ways. \bibleverse{15} What is the Almighty, that we
should serve him? What profit should we have, if we pray to him?'
\bibleverse{16} Behold, their prosperity is not in their hand. The
counsel of the wicked is far from me. \bibleverse{17} ``How often is it
that the lamp of the wicked is put out, that their calamity comes on
them, that God distributes sorrows in his anger? \bibleverse{18} How
often is it that they are as stubble before the wind, as chaff that the
storm carries away? \bibleverse{19} You say, `God lays up his iniquity
for his children.' Let him recompense it to himself, that he may know
it. \bibleverse{20} Let his own eyes see his destruction. Let him drink
of the wrath of the Almighty. \bibleverse{21} For what does he care for
his house after him, when the number of his months is cut off?
\bibleverse{22} ``Shall any teach God knowledge, since he judges those
who are high? \bibleverse{23} One dies in his full strength, being
wholly at ease and quiet. \bibleverse{24} His pails are full of milk.
The marrow of his bones is moistened. \bibleverse{25} Another dies in
bitterness of soul, and never tastes of good. \bibleverse{26} They lie
down alike in the dust. The worm covers them. \bibleverse{27} ``Behold,
I know your thoughts, the plans with which you would wrong me.
\bibleverse{28} For you say, `Where is the house of the prince? Where is
the tent in which the wicked lived?' \bibleverse{29} Haven't you asked
wayfaring men? Don't you know their evidences, \bibleverse{30} that the
evil man is reserved to the day of calamity, that they are led out to
the day of wrath? \bibleverse{31} Who will declare his way to his face?
Who will repay him what he has done? \bibleverse{32} Yet he will be
borne to the grave. Men will keep watch over the tomb. \bibleverse{33}
The clods of the valley will be sweet to him. All men will draw after
him, as there were innumerable before him. \bibleverse{34} So how can
you comfort me with nonsense, because in your answers there remains only
falsehood?''

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Can
a man be profitable to God? Surely he who is wise is profitable to
himself. \bibleverse{3} Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that you are
righteous? Or does it benefit him that you make your ways perfect?
\bibleverse{4} Is it for your piety that he reproves you, that he enters
with you into judgment? \bibleverse{5} Isn't your wickedness great?
Neither is there any end to your iniquities. \bibleverse{6} For you have
taken pledges from your brother for nothing, and stripped the naked of
their clothing. \bibleverse{7} You haven't given water to the weary to
drink, and you have withheld bread from the hungry. \bibleverse{8} But
as for the mighty man, he had the earth. The honorable man, he lived in
it. \bibleverse{9} You have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the
fatherless have been broken. \bibleverse{10} Therefore snares are around
you. Sudden fear troubles you, \bibleverse{11} or darkness, so that you
can not see, and floods of waters cover you. \bibleverse{12} ``Isn't God
in the heights of heaven? See the height of the stars, how high they
are! \bibleverse{13} You say, `What does God know? Can he judge through
the thick darkness? \bibleverse{14} Thick clouds are a covering to him,
so that he doesn't see. He walks on the vault of the sky.'
\bibleverse{15} Will you keep the old way, which wicked men have
trodden, \bibleverse{16} who were snatched away before their time, whose
foundation was poured out as a stream, \bibleverse{17} who said to God,
`Depart from us!' and, `What can the Almighty do for us?'
\bibleverse{18} Yet he filled their houses with good things, but the
counsel of the wicked is far from me. \bibleverse{19} The righteous see
it, and are glad. The innocent ridicule them, \bibleverse{20} saying,
`Surely those who rose up against us are cut off. The fire has consumed
their remnant.' \bibleverse{21} ``Acquaint yourself with him now, and be
at peace. By it, good will come to you. \bibleverse{22} Please receive
instruction from his mouth, and lay up his words in your heart.
\bibleverse{23} If you return to the Almighty, you will be built up, if
you put away unrighteousness far from your tents. \bibleverse{24} Lay
your treasure in the dust, the gold of Ophir among the stones of the
brooks. \bibleverse{25} The Almighty will be your treasure, and precious
silver to you. \bibleverse{26} For then you will delight yourself in the
Almighty, and will lift up your face to God. \bibleverse{27} You will
make your prayer to him, and he will hear you. You will pay your vows.
\bibleverse{28} You will also decree a thing, and it will be established
to you. Light will shine on your ways. \bibleverse{29} When they cast
down, you will say, `be lifted up.' He will save the humble person.
\bibleverse{30} He will even deliver him who is not innocent. Yes, he
will be delivered through the cleanness of your hands.''

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Even today my
complaint is rebellious. His hand is heavy in spite of my groaning.
\bibleverse{3} Oh that I knew where I might find him! That I might come
even to his seat! \bibleverse{4} I would set my cause in order before
him, and fill my mouth with arguments. \bibleverse{5} I would know the
words which he would answer me, and understand what he would tell me.
\bibleverse{6} Would he contend with me in the greatness of his power?
No, but he would listen to me. \bibleverse{7} There the upright might
reason with him, so I should be delivered forever from my judge.
\bibleverse{8} ``If I go east, he is not there. If I go west, I can't
find him. \bibleverse{9} He works to the north, but I can't see him. He
turns south, but I can't catch a glimpse of him. \bibleverse{10} But he
knows the way that I take. When he has tried me, I will come out like
gold. \bibleverse{11} My foot has held fast to his steps. I have kept
his way, and not turned away. \bibleverse{12} I haven't gone back from
the commandment of his lips. I have treasured up the words of his mouth
more than my necessary food. \bibleverse{13} But he stands alone, and
who can oppose him? What his soul desires, even that he does.
\bibleverse{14} For he performs that which is appointed for me. Many
such things are with him. \bibleverse{15} Therefore I am terrified at
his presence. When I consider, I am afraid of him. \bibleverse{16} For
God has made my heart faint. The Almighty has terrified me.
\bibleverse{17} Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither
did he cover the thick darkness from my face.

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Why aren't times laid up by the Almighty? Why don't
those who know him see his days? \bibleverse{2} There are people who
remove the landmarks. They violently take away flocks, and feed them.
\bibleverse{3} They drive away the donkey of the fatherless, and they
take the widow's ox for a pledge. \bibleverse{4} They turn the needy out
of the way. The poor of the earth all hide themselves. \bibleverse{5}
Behold, as wild donkeys in the desert, they go out to their work,
seeking diligently for food. The wilderness yields them bread for their
children. \bibleverse{6} They cut their food in the field. They glean
the vineyard of the wicked. \bibleverse{7} They lie all night naked
without clothing, and have no covering in the cold. \bibleverse{8} They
are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for lack
of a shelter. \bibleverse{9} There are those who pluck the fatherless
from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor, \bibleverse{10} so that
they go around naked without clothing. Being hungry, they carry the
sheaves. \bibleverse{11} They make oil within the walls of these men.
They tread wine presses, and suffer thirst. \bibleverse{12} From out of
the populous city, men groan. The soul of the wounded cries out, yet God
doesn't regard the folly. \bibleverse{13} ``These are of those who rebel
against the light. They don't know its ways, nor stay in its paths.
\bibleverse{14} The murderer rises with the light. He kills the poor and
needy. In the night he is like a thief. \bibleverse{15} The eye also of
the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, `No eye will see me.' He
disguises his face. \bibleverse{16} In the dark they dig through houses.
They shut themselves up in the daytime. They don't know the light.
\bibleverse{17} For the morning is to all of them like thick darkness,
for they know the terrors of the thick darkness. \bibleverse{18} ``They
are foam on the surface of the waters. Their portion is cursed in the
earth. They don't turn into the way of the vineyards. \bibleverse{19}
Drought and heat consume the snow waters, so does Sheol\footnote{\textbf{24:19}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} those who have sinned.
\bibleverse{20} The womb will forget him. The worm will feed sweetly on
him. He will be no more remembered. Unrighteousness will be broken as a
tree. \bibleverse{21} He devours the barren who don't bear. He shows no
kindness to the widow. \bibleverse{22} Yet God preserves the mighty by
his power. He rises up who has no assurance of life. \bibleverse{23} God
gives them security, and they rest in it. His eyes are on their ways.
\bibleverse{24} They are exalted; yet a little while, and they are gone.
Yes, they are brought low, they are taken out of the way as all others,
and are cut off as the tops of the ears of grain. \bibleverse{25} If it
isn't so now, who will prove me a liar, and make my speech worth
nothing?''

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, \bibleverse{2}
``Dominion and fear are with him. He makes peace in his high places.
\bibleverse{3} Can his armies be counted? On whom does his light not
arise? \bibleverse{4} How then can man be just with God? Or how can he
who is born of a woman be clean? \bibleverse{5} Behold, even the moon
has no brightness, and the stars are not pure in his sight;
\bibleverse{6} How much less man, who is a worm, and the son of man, who
is a worm!''

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibleverse{2} ``How have you helped
him who is without power! How have you saved the arm that has no
strength! \bibleverse{3} How have you counseled him who has no wisdom,
and plentifully declared sound knowledge! \bibleverse{4} To whom have
you uttered words? Whose spirit came out of you? \bibleverse{5} ``The
departed spirits tremble, those beneath the waters and all that live in
them. \bibleverse{6} Sheol\footnote{\textbf{26:6} Sheol is the place of
  the dead.} is naked before God, and Abaddon\footnote{\textbf{26:6}
  Abaddon means Destroyer.} has no covering. \bibleverse{7} He stretches
out the north over empty space, and hangs the earth on nothing.
\bibleverse{8} He binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud
is not burst under them. \bibleverse{9} He encloses the face of his
throne, and spreads his cloud on it. \bibleverse{10} He has described a
boundary on the surface of the waters, and to the confines of light and
darkness. \bibleverse{11} The pillars of heaven tremble and are
astonished at his rebuke. \bibleverse{12} He stirs up the sea with his
power, and by his understanding he strikes through Rahab.
\bibleverse{13} By his Spirit the heavens are garnished. His hand has
pierced the swift serpent. \bibleverse{14} Behold, these are but the
outskirts of his ways. How small a whisper do we hear of him! But the
thunder of his power who can understand?''

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} Job again took up his parable, and said, \bibleverse{2}
``As God lives, who has taken away my right, the Almighty, who has made
my soul bitter \bibleverse{3} (for the length of my life is still in me,
and the spirit of God is in my nostrils); \bibleverse{4} surely my lips
will not speak unrighteousness, neither will my tongue utter deceit.
\bibleverse{5} Far be it from me that I should justify you. Until I die
I will not put away my integrity from me. \bibleverse{6} I hold fast to
my righteousness, and will not let it go. My heart will not reproach me
so long as I live. \bibleverse{7} ``Let my enemy be as the wicked. Let
him who rises up against me be as the unrighteous. \bibleverse{8} For
what is the hope of the godless, when he is cut off, when God takes away
his life? \bibleverse{9} Will God hear his cry when trouble comes on
him? \bibleverse{10} Will he delight himself in the Almighty, and call
on God at all times? \bibleverse{11} I will teach you about the hand of
God. I will not conceal that which is with the Almighty. \bibleverse{12}
Behold, all of you have seen it yourselves; why then have you become
altogether vain? \bibleverse{13} ``This is the portion of a wicked man
with God, the heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the
Almighty. \bibleverse{14} If his children are multiplied, it is for the
sword. His offspring will not be satisfied with bread. \bibleverse{15}
Those who remain of him will be buried in death. His widows will make no
lamentation. \bibleverse{16} Though he heap up silver as the dust, and
prepare clothing as the clay; \bibleverse{17} he may prepare it, but the
just will put it on, and the innocent will divide the silver.
\bibleverse{18} He builds his house as the moth, as a booth which the
watchman makes. \bibleverse{19} He lies down rich, but he will not do so
again. He opens his eyes, and he is not. \bibleverse{20} Terrors
overtake him like waters. A storm steals him away in the night.
\bibleverse{21} The east wind carries him away, and he departs. It
sweeps him out of his place. \bibleverse{22} For it hurls at him, and
does not spare, as he flees away from his hand. \bibleverse{23} Men will
clap their hands at him, and will hiss him out of his place.

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Surely there is a mine for silver, and a place for gold
which they refine. \bibleverse{2} Iron is taken out of the earth, and
copper is smelted out of the ore. \bibleverse{3} Man sets an end to
darkness, and searches out, to the furthest bound, the stones of
obscurity and of thick darkness. \bibleverse{4} He breaks open a shaft
away from where people live. They are forgotten by the foot. They hang
far from men, they swing back and forth. \bibleverse{5} As for the
earth, out of it comes bread. Underneath it is turned up as it were by
fire. \bibleverse{6} Sapphires come from its rocks. It has dust of gold.
\bibleverse{7} That path no bird of prey knows, neither has the falcon's
eye seen it. \bibleverse{8} The proud animals have not trodden it, nor
has the fierce lion passed by there. \bibleverse{9} He puts his hand on
the flinty rock, and he overturns the mountains by the roots.
\bibleverse{10} He cuts out channels among the rocks. His eye sees every
precious thing. \bibleverse{11} He binds the streams that they don't
trickle. The thing that is hidden he brings out to light.
\bibleverse{12} ``But where will wisdom be found? Where is the place of
understanding? \bibleverse{13} Man doesn't know its price, and it isn't
found in the land of the living. \bibleverse{14} The deep says, `It
isn't in me.' The sea says, `It isn't with me.' \bibleverse{15} It can't
be gotten for gold, neither will silver be weighed for its price.
\bibleverse{16} It can't be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the
precious onyx, or the sapphire.\footnote{\textbf{28:16} or, lapis lazuli}
\bibleverse{17} Gold and glass can't equal it, neither will it be
exchanged for jewels of fine gold. \bibleverse{18} No mention will be
made of coral or of crystal. Yes, the price of wisdom is above rubies.
\bibleverse{19} The topaz of Ethiopia will not equal it. It won't be
valued with pure gold. \bibleverse{20} Where then does wisdom come from?
Where is the place of understanding? \bibleverse{21} Seeing it is hidden
from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the birds of the sky.
\bibleverse{22} Destruction and Death say, `We have heard a rumor of it
with our ears.' \bibleverse{23} ``God understands its way, and he knows
its place. \bibleverse{24} For he looks to the ends of the earth, and
sees under the whole sky. \bibleverse{25} He establishes the force of
the wind. Yes, he measures out the waters by measure. \bibleverse{26}
When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the
thunder, \bibleverse{27} then he saw it, and declared it. He established
it, yes, and searched it out. \bibleverse{28} To man he said, `Behold,
the fear of the Lord,\footnote{\textbf{28:28} The word translated
  ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} that is wisdom. To depart from evil is
understanding.'\,''

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{29}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} Job again took up his parable, and said, \bibleverse{2}
``Oh that I were as in the months of old, as in the days when God
watched over me; \bibleverse{3} when his lamp shone on my head, and by
his light I walked through darkness, \bibleverse{4} as I was in my
prime, when the friendship of God was in my tent, \bibleverse{5} when
the Almighty was yet with me, and my children were around me,
\bibleverse{6} when my steps were washed with butter, and the rock
poured out streams of oil for me, \bibleverse{7} when I went out to the
city gate, when I prepared my seat in the street. \bibleverse{8} The
young men saw me and hid themselves. The aged rose up and stood.
\bibleverse{9} The princes refrained from talking, and laid their hand
on their mouth. \bibleverse{10} The voice of the nobles was hushed, and
their tongue stuck to the roof of their mouth. \bibleverse{11} For when
the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it
commended me, \bibleverse{12} because I delivered the poor who cried,
and the fatherless also, who had no one to help him, \bibleverse{13} the
blessing of him who was ready to perish came on me, and I caused the
widow's heart to sing for joy. \bibleverse{14} I put on righteousness,
and it clothed me. My justice was as a robe and a diadem.
\bibleverse{15} I was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame.
\bibleverse{16} I was a father to the needy. I researched the cause of
him whom I didn't know. \bibleverse{17} I broke the jaws of the
unrighteous and plucked the prey out of his teeth. \bibleverse{18} Then
I said, `I will die in my own house, I will count my days as the sand.
\bibleverse{19} My root is spread out to the waters. The dew lies all
night on my branch. \bibleverse{20} My glory is fresh in me. My bow is
renewed in my hand.' \bibleverse{21} ``Men listened to me, waited, and
kept silence for my counsel. \bibleverse{22} After my words they didn't
speak again. My speech fell on them. \bibleverse{23} They waited for me
as for the rain. Their mouths drank as with the spring rain.
\bibleverse{24} I smiled on them when they had no confidence. They
didn't reject the light of my face. \bibleverse{25} I chose out their
way, and sat as chief. I lived as a king in the army, as one who
comforts the mourners.

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{30}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} ``But now those who are younger than I have me in
derision, whose fathers I considered unworthy to put with my sheep dogs.
\bibleverse{2} Of what use is the strength of their hands to me, men in
whom ripe age has perished? \bibleverse{3} They are gaunt from lack and
famine. They gnaw the dry ground, in the gloom of waste and desolation.
\bibleverse{4} They pluck salt herbs by the bushes. The roots of the
broom tree are their food. \bibleverse{5} They are driven out from among
men. They cry after them as after a thief, \bibleverse{6} so that they
live in frightful valleys, and in holes of the earth and of the rocks.
\bibleverse{7} They bray among the bushes. They are gathered together
under the nettles. \bibleverse{8} They are children of fools, yes,
children of wicked men. They were flogged out of the land.
\bibleverse{9} ``Now I have become their song. Yes, I am a byword to
them. \bibleverse{10} They abhor me, they stand aloof from me, and don't
hesitate to spit in my face. \bibleverse{11} For he has untied his cord,
and afflicted me; and they have thrown off restraint before me.
\bibleverse{12} On my right hand rise the rabble. They thrust aside my
feet. They cast their ways of destruction up against me. \bibleverse{13}
They mar my path. They promote my destruction without anyone's help.
\bibleverse{14} As through a wide breach they come. They roll themselves
in amid the ruin. \bibleverse{15} Terrors have turned on me. They chase
my honor as the wind. My welfare has passed away as a cloud.
\bibleverse{16} ``Now my soul is poured out within me. Days of
affliction have taken hold of me. \bibleverse{17} In the night season my
bones are pierced in me, and the pains that gnaw me take no rest.
\bibleverse{18} My garment is disfigured by great force. It binds me
about as the collar of my tunic. \bibleverse{19} He has cast me into the
mire. I have become like dust and ashes. \bibleverse{20} I cry to you,
and you do not answer me. I stand up, and you gaze at me.
\bibleverse{21} You have turned to be cruel to me. With the might of
your hand you persecute me. \bibleverse{22} You lift me up to the wind,
and drive me with it. You dissolve me in the storm. \bibleverse{23} For
I know that you will bring me to death, to the house appointed for all
living. \bibleverse{24} ``However doesn't one stretch out a hand in his
fall? Or in his calamity therefore cry for help? \bibleverse{25} Didn't
I weep for him who was in trouble? Wasn't my soul grieved for the needy?
\bibleverse{26} When I looked for good, then evil came. When I waited
for light, darkness came. \bibleverse{27} My heart is troubled, and
doesn't rest. Days of affliction have come on me. \bibleverse{28} I go
mourning without the sun. I stand up in the assembly, and cry for help.
\bibleverse{29} I am a brother to jackals, and a companion to ostriches.
\bibleverse{30} My skin grows black and peels from me. My bones are
burned with heat. \bibleverse{31} Therefore my harp has turned to
mourning, and my pipe into the voice of those who weep.

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{31}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} ``I made a covenant with my eyes; how then should I look
lustfully at a young woman? \bibleverse{2} For what is the portion from
God above, and the heritage from the Almighty on high? \bibleverse{3} Is
it not calamity to the unrighteous, and disaster to the workers of
iniquity? \bibleverse{4} Doesn't he see my ways, and count all my steps?
\bibleverse{5} ``If I have walked with falsehood, and my foot has
hurried to deceit \bibleverse{6} (let me be weighed in an even balance,
that God may know my integrity); \bibleverse{7} if my step has turned
out of the way, if my heart walked after my eyes, if any defilement has
stuck to my hands, \bibleverse{8} then let me sow, and let another eat.
Yes, let the produce of my field be rooted out. \bibleverse{9} ``If my
heart has been enticed to a woman, and I have laid wait at my neighbor's
door, \bibleverse{10} then let my wife grind for another, and let others
sleep with her. \bibleverse{11} For that would be a heinous crime. Yes,
it would be an iniquity to be punished by the judges, \bibleverse{12}
for it is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all my
increase. \bibleverse{13} ``If I have despised the cause of my male
servant or of my female servant, when they contended with me,
\bibleverse{14} what then will I do when God rises up? When he visits,
what will I answer him? \bibleverse{15} Didn't he who made me in the
womb make him? Didn't one fashion us in the womb? \bibleverse{16} ``If I
have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the
widow to fail, \bibleverse{17} or have eaten my morsel alone, and the
fatherless has not eaten of it \bibleverse{18} (no, from my youth he
grew up with me as with a father, I have guided her from my mother's
womb); \bibleverse{19} if I have seen any perish for want of clothing,
or that the needy had no covering; \bibleverse{20} if his heart hasn't
blessed me, if he hasn't been warmed with my sheep's fleece;
\bibleverse{21} if I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless,
because I saw my help in the gate; \bibleverse{22} then let my shoulder
fall from the shoulder blade, and my arm be broken from the bone.
\bibleverse{23} For calamity from God is a terror to me. Because of his
majesty, I can do nothing. \bibleverse{24} ``If I have made gold my
hope, and have said to the fine gold, `You are my confidence;'
\bibleverse{25} If I have rejoiced because my wealth was great, and
because my hand had gotten much; \bibleverse{26} if I have seen the sun
when it shined, or the moon moving in splendor, \bibleverse{27} and my
heart has been secretly enticed, and my hand threw a kiss from my mouth;
\bibleverse{28} this also would be an iniquity to be punished by the
judges, for I would have denied the God who is above. \bibleverse{29}
``If I have rejoiced at the destruction of him who hated me, or lifted
up myself when evil found him \bibleverse{30} (I have certainly not
allowed my mouth to sin by asking his life with a curse);
\bibleverse{31} if the men of my tent have not said, `Who can find one
who has not been filled with his meat?' \bibleverse{32} (the foreigner
has not camped in the street, but I have opened my doors to the
traveler); \bibleverse{33} if like Adam I have covered my
transgressions, by hiding my iniquity in my heart, \bibleverse{34}
because I feared the great multitude, and the contempt of families
terrified me, so that I kept silence, and didn't go out of the door---
\bibleverse{35} oh that I had one to hear me! Behold, here is my
signature! Let the Almighty answer me! Let the accuser write my
indictment! \bibleverse{36} Surely I would carry it on my shoulder, and
I would bind it to me as a crown. \bibleverse{37} I would declare to him
the number of my steps. I would go near to him like a prince.
\bibleverse{38} If my land cries out against me, and its furrows weep
together; \bibleverse{39} if I have eaten its fruits without money, or
have caused its owners to lose their life, \bibleverse{40} let briers
grow instead of wheat, and stinkweed instead of barley.''

The words of Job are ended.

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{32}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was
righteous in his own eyes. \bibleverse{2} Then the wrath of Elihu the
son of Barachel, the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was kindled against
Job. His wrath was kindled because he justified himself rather than God.
\bibleverse{3} Also his wrath was kindled against his three friends,
because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
\bibleverse{4} Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job, because they were
older than he. \bibleverse{5} When Elihu saw that there was no answer in
the mouth of these three men, his wrath was kindled.

\bibleverse{6} Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered, ``I am
young, and you are very old. Therefore I held back, and didn't dare show
you my opinion. \bibleverse{7} I said, `Days should speak, and multitude
of years should teach wisdom.' \bibleverse{8} But there is a spirit in
man, and the Spirit\footnote{\textbf{32:8} or, breath} of the Almighty
gives them understanding. \bibleverse{9} It is not the great who are
wise, nor the aged who understand justice. \bibleverse{10} Therefore I
said, `Listen to me; I also will show my opinion.' \bibleverse{11}
``Behold, I waited for your words, and I listened for your reasoning,
while you searched out what to say. \bibleverse{12} Yes, I gave you my
full attention, but there was no one who convinced Job, or who answered
his words, among you. \bibleverse{13} Beware lest you say, `We have
found wisdom. God may refute him, not man;' \bibleverse{14} for he has
not directed his words against me; neither will I answer him with your
speeches. \bibleverse{15} ``They are amazed. They answer no more. They
don't have a word to say. \bibleverse{16} Shall I wait, because they
don't speak, because they stand still, and answer no more?
\bibleverse{17} I also will answer my part, and I also will show my
opinion. \bibleverse{18} For I am full of words. The spirit within me
constrains me. \bibleverse{19} Behold, my breast is as wine which has no
vent; like new wineskins it is ready to burst. \bibleverse{20} I will
speak, that I may be refreshed. I will open my lips and answer.
\bibleverse{21} Please don't let me respect any man's person, neither
will I give flattering titles to any man. \bibleverse{22} For I don't
know how to give flattering titles, or else my Maker would soon take me
away.

\hypertarget{section-32}{%
\section{33}\label{section-32}}

\bibleverse{1} ``However, Job, please hear my speech, and listen to all
my words. \bibleverse{2} See now, I have opened my mouth. My tongue has
spoken in my mouth. \bibleverse{3} My words will utter the uprightness
of my heart. That which my lips know they will speak sincerely.
\bibleverse{4} The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty gives me life. \bibleverse{5} If you can, answer me. Set your
words in order before me, and stand up. \bibleverse{6} Behold, I am
toward God even as you are. I am also formed out of the clay.
\bibleverse{7} Behold, my terror will not make you afraid, neither will
my pressure be heavy on you. \bibleverse{8} ``Surely you have spoken in
my hearing, I have heard the voice of your words, saying, \bibleverse{9}
`I am clean, without disobedience. I am innocent, neither is there
iniquity in me. \bibleverse{10} Behold, he finds occasions against me.
He counts me for his enemy. \bibleverse{11} He puts my feet in the
stocks. He marks all my paths.' \bibleverse{12} ``Behold, I will answer
you. In this you are not just, for God is greater than man.
\bibleverse{13} Why do you strive against him, because he doesn't give
account of any of his matters? \bibleverse{14} For God speaks once, yes
twice, though man pays no attention. \bibleverse{15} In a dream, in a
vision of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, in slumbering on the
bed, \bibleverse{16} then he opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction, \bibleverse{17} that he may withdraw man from his purpose,
and hide pride from man. \bibleverse{18} He keeps back his soul from the
pit, and his life from perishing by the sword. \bibleverse{19} ``He is
chastened also with pain on his bed, with continual strife in his bones,
\bibleverse{20} so that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty food.
\bibleverse{21} His flesh is so consumed away that it can't be seen. His
bones that were not seen stick out. \bibleverse{22} Yes, his soul draws
near to the pit, and his life to the destroyers. \bibleverse{23} ``If
there is beside him an angel, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to
show to man what is right for him, \bibleverse{24} then God is gracious
to him, and says, `Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found
a ransom.' \bibleverse{25} His flesh will be fresher than a child's. He
returns to the days of his youth. \bibleverse{26} He prays to God, and
he is favorable to him, so that he sees his face with joy. He restores
to man his righteousness. \bibleverse{27} He sings before men, and says,
`I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it didn't profit
me. \bibleverse{28} He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit. My
life will see the light.' \bibleverse{29} ``Behold, God does all these
things, twice, yes three times, with a man, \bibleverse{30} to bring
back his soul from the pit, that he may be enlightened with the light of
the living. \bibleverse{31} Mark well, Job, and listen to me. Hold your
peace, and I will speak. \bibleverse{32} If you have anything to say,
answer me. Speak, for I desire to justify you. \bibleverse{33} If not,
listen to me. Hold your peace, and I will teach you wisdom.''

\hypertarget{section-33}{%
\section{34}\label{section-33}}

\bibleverse{1} Moreover Elihu answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Hear my words,
you wise men. Give ear to me, you who have knowledge. \bibleverse{3} For
the ear tries words, as the palate tastes food. \bibleverse{4} Let us
choose for us that which is right. Let us know among ourselves what is
good. \bibleverse{5} For Job has said, `I am righteous, God has taken
away my right. \bibleverse{6} Notwithstanding my right I am considered a
liar. My wound is incurable, though I am without disobedience.'
\bibleverse{7} What man is like Job, who drinks scorn like water,
\bibleverse{8} who goes in company with the workers of iniquity, and
walks with wicked men? \bibleverse{9} For he has said, `It profits a man
nothing that he should delight himself with God.' \bibleverse{10}
``Therefore listen to me, you men of understanding: far be it from God,
that he should do wickedness, from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity. \bibleverse{11} For the work of a man he will render to him,
and cause every man to find according to his ways. \bibleverse{12} Yes
surely, God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert
justice. \bibleverse{13} Who put him in charge of the earth? Or who has
appointed him over the whole world? \bibleverse{14} If he set his heart
on himself, if he gathered to himself his spirit and his breath,
\bibleverse{15} all flesh would perish together, and man would turn
again to dust. \bibleverse{16} ``If now you have understanding, hear
this. Listen to the voice of my words. \bibleverse{17} Should even one
who hates justice govern? Will you condemn him who is righteous and
mighty, \bibleverse{18} who says to a king, `Vile!' or to nobles,
`Wicked!'? \bibleverse{19} He doesn't respect the persons of princes,
nor respect the rich more than the poor, for they all are the work of
his hands. \bibleverse{20} In a moment they die, even at midnight. The
people are shaken and pass away. The mighty are taken away without a
hand. \bibleverse{21} ``For his eyes are on the ways of a man. He sees
all his goings. \bibleverse{22} There is no darkness, nor thick gloom,
where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. \bibleverse{23} For
he doesn't need to consider a man further, that he should go before God
in judgment. \bibleverse{24} He breaks mighty men in pieces in ways past
finding out, and sets others in their place. \bibleverse{25} Therefore
he takes knowledge of their works. He overturns them in the night, so
that they are destroyed. \bibleverse{26} He strikes them as wicked men
in the open sight of others; \bibleverse{27} because they turned away
from following him, and wouldn't pay attention to any of his ways,
\bibleverse{28} so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him.
He heard the cry of the afflicted. \bibleverse{29} When he gives
quietness, who then can condemn? When he hides his face, who then can
see him? He is over a nation or a man alike, \bibleverse{30} that the
godless man may not reign, that there be no one to ensnare the people.
\bibleverse{31} ``For has any said to God, `I am guilty, but I will not
offend any more. \bibleverse{32} Teach me that which I don't see. If I
have done iniquity, I will do it no more'? \bibleverse{33} Shall his
recompense be as you desire, that you refuse it? For you must choose,
and not I. Therefore speak what you know. \bibleverse{34} Men of
understanding will tell me, yes, every wise man who hears me:
\bibleverse{35} `Job speaks without knowledge. His words are without
wisdom.' \bibleverse{36} I wish that Job were tried to the end, because
of his answering like wicked men. \bibleverse{37} For he adds rebellion
to his sin. He claps his hands among us, and multiplies his words
against God.''

\hypertarget{section-34}{%
\section{35}\label{section-34}}

\bibleverse{1} Moreover Elihu answered, \bibleverse{2} ``Do you think
this to be your right, or do you say, `My righteousness is more than
God's,' \bibleverse{3} that you ask, `What advantage will it be to you?
What profit will I have, more than if I had sinned?' \bibleverse{4} I
will answer you, and your companions with you. \bibleverse{5} Look to
the skies, and see. See the skies, which are higher than you.
\bibleverse{6} If you have sinned, what effect do you have against him?
If your transgressions are multiplied, what do you do to him?
\bibleverse{7} If you are righteous, what do you give him? Or what does
he receive from your hand? \bibleverse{8} Your wickedness may hurt a man
as you are, and your righteousness may profit a son of man.
\bibleverse{9} ``By reason of the multitude of oppressions they cry out.
They cry for help by reason of the arm of the mighty. \bibleverse{10}
But no one says, `Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night,
\bibleverse{11} who teaches us more than the animals of the earth, and
makes us wiser than the birds of the sky?' \bibleverse{12} There they
cry, but no one answers, because of the pride of evil men.
\bibleverse{13} Surely God will not hear an empty cry, neither will the
Almighty regard it. \bibleverse{14} How much less when you say you don't
see him. The cause is before him, and you wait for him! \bibleverse{15}
But now, because he has not visited in his anger, neither does he
greatly regard arrogance, \bibleverse{16} therefore Job opens his mouth
with empty talk, and he multiplies words without knowledge.''

\hypertarget{section-35}{%
\section{36}\label{section-35}}

\bibleverse{1} Elihu also continued, and said, \bibleverse{2} ``Bear
with me a little, and I will show you; for I still have something to say
on God's behalf. \bibleverse{3} I will get my knowledge from afar, and
will ascribe righteousness to my Maker. \bibleverse{4} For truly my
words are not false. One who is perfect in knowledge is with you.
\bibleverse{5} ``Behold, God is mighty, and doesn't despise anyone. He
is mighty in strength of understanding. \bibleverse{6} He doesn't
preserve the life of the wicked, but gives justice to the afflicted.
\bibleverse{7} He doesn't withdraw his eyes from the righteous, but with
kings on the throne, he sets them forever, and they are exalted.
\bibleverse{8} If they are bound in fetters, and are taken in the cords
of afflictions, \bibleverse{9} then he shows them their work, and their
transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly.
\bibleverse{10} He also opens their ears to instruction, and commands
that they return from iniquity. \bibleverse{11} If they listen and serve
him, they will spend their days in prosperity, and their years in
pleasures. \bibleverse{12} But if they don't listen, they will perish by
the sword; they will die without knowledge. \bibleverse{13} ``But those
who are godless in heart lay up anger. They don't cry for help when he
binds them. \bibleverse{14} They die in youth. Their life perishes among
the unclean. \bibleverse{15} He delivers the afflicted by their
affliction, and opens their ear in oppression. \bibleverse{16} Yes, he
would have allured you out of distress, into a wide place, where there
is no restriction. That which is set on your table would be full of
fatness. \bibleverse{17} ``But you are full of the judgment of the
wicked. Judgment and justice take hold of you. \bibleverse{18} Don't let
riches entice you to wrath, neither let the great size of a bribe turn
you aside. \bibleverse{19} Would your wealth sustain you in distress, or
all the might of your strength? \bibleverse{20} Don't desire the night,
when people are cut off in their place. \bibleverse{21} Take heed, don't
regard iniquity; for you have chosen this rather than affliction.
\bibleverse{22} Behold, God is exalted in his power. Who is a teacher
like him? \bibleverse{23} Who has prescribed his way for him? Or who can
say, `You have committed unrighteousness?' \bibleverse{24} ``Remember
that you magnify his work, about which men have sung. \bibleverse{25}
All men have looked on it. Man sees it afar off. \bibleverse{26} Behold,
God is great, and we don't know him. The number of his years is
unsearchable. \bibleverse{27} For he draws up the drops of water, which
distill in rain from his vapor, \bibleverse{28} which the skies pour
down and which drop on man abundantly. \bibleverse{29} Indeed, can
anyone understand the spreading of the clouds and the thunderings of his
pavilion? \bibleverse{30} Behold, he spreads his light around him. He
covers the bottom of the sea. \bibleverse{31} For by these he judges the
people. He gives food in abundance. \bibleverse{32} He covers his hands
with the lightning, and commands it to strike the mark. \bibleverse{33}
Its noise tells about him, and the livestock also, concerning the storm
that comes up.

\hypertarget{section-36}{%
\section{37}\label{section-36}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Yes, at this my heart trembles, and is moved out of its
place. \bibleverse{2} Hear, oh, hear the noise of his voice, the sound
that goes out of his mouth. \bibleverse{3} He sends it out under the
whole sky, and his lightning to the ends of the earth. \bibleverse{4}
After it a voice roars. He thunders with the voice of his majesty. He
doesn't hold back anything when his voice is heard. \bibleverse{5} God
thunders marvelously with his voice. He does great things, which we
can't comprehend. \bibleverse{6} For he says to the snow, `Fall on the
earth,' likewise to the shower of rain, and to the showers of his mighty
rain. \bibleverse{7} He seals up the hand of every man, that all men
whom he has made may know it. \bibleverse{8} Then the animals take
cover, and remain in their dens. \bibleverse{9} Out of its room comes
the storm, and cold out of the north. \bibleverse{10} By the breath of
God, ice is given, and the width of the waters is frozen.
\bibleverse{11} Yes, he loads the thick cloud with moisture. He spreads
abroad the cloud of his lightning. \bibleverse{12} It is turned around
by his guidance, that they may do whatever he commands them on the
surface of the habitable world, \bibleverse{13} whether it is for
correction, or for his land, or for loving kindness, that he causes it
to come. \bibleverse{14} ``Listen to this, Job. Stand still, and
consider the wondrous works of God. \bibleverse{15} Do you know how God
controls them, and causes the lightning of his cloud to shine?
\bibleverse{16} Do you know the workings of the clouds, the wondrous
works of him who is perfect in knowledge? \bibleverse{17} You whose
clothing is warm when the earth is still by reason of the south wind?
\bibleverse{18} Can you, with him, spread out the sky, which is strong
as a cast metal mirror? \bibleverse{19} Teach us what we will tell him,
for we can't make our case by reason of darkness. \bibleverse{20} Will
it be told him that I would speak? Or should a man wish that he were
swallowed up? \bibleverse{21} Now men don't see the light which is
bright in the skies, but the wind passes, and clears them.
\bibleverse{22} Out of the north comes golden splendor. With God is
awesome majesty. \bibleverse{23} We can't reach the Almighty. He is
exalted in power. In justice and great righteousness, he will not
oppress. \bibleverse{24} Therefore men revere him. He doesn't regard any
who are wise of heart.''

\hypertarget{section-37}{%
\section{38}\label{section-37}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Yahweh answered Job out of the whirlwind,
\bibleverse{2} ``Who is this who darkens counsel by words without
knowledge? \bibleverse{3} Brace yourself like a man, for I will question
you, then you answer me! \bibleverse{4} ``Where were you when I laid the
foundations of the earth? Declare, if you have understanding.
\bibleverse{5} Who determined its measures, if you know? Or who
stretched the line on it? \bibleverse{6} What were its foundations
fastened on? Or who laid its cornerstone, \bibleverse{7} when the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
\bibleverse{8} ``Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it broke out of
the womb, \bibleverse{9} when I made clouds its garment, and wrapped it
in thick darkness, \bibleverse{10} marked out for it my bound, set bars
and doors, \bibleverse{11} and said, `You may come here, but no further.
Your proud waves shall be stopped here'? \bibleverse{12} ``Have you
commanded the morning in your days, and caused the dawn to know its
place, \bibleverse{13} that it might take hold of the ends of the earth,
and shake the wicked out of it? \bibleverse{14} It is changed as clay
under the seal, and presented as a garment. \bibleverse{15} From the
wicked, their light is withheld. The high arm is broken. \bibleverse{16}
``Have you entered into the springs of the sea? Or have you walked in
the recesses of the deep? \bibleverse{17} Have the gates of death been
revealed to you? Or have you seen the gates of the shadow of death?
\bibleverse{18} Have you comprehended the earth in its width? Declare,
if you know it all. \bibleverse{19} ``What is the way to the dwelling of
light? As for darkness, where is its place, \bibleverse{20} that you
should take it to its bound, that you should discern the paths to its
house? \bibleverse{21} Surely you know, for you were born then, and the
number of your days is great! \bibleverse{22} Have you entered the
storehouses of the snow, or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
\bibleverse{23} which I have reserved against the time of trouble,
against the day of battle and war? \bibleverse{24} By what way is the
lightning distributed, or the east wind scattered on the earth?
\bibleverse{25} Who has cut a channel for the flood water, or the path
for the thunderstorm, \bibleverse{26} to cause it to rain on a land
where there is no man, on the wilderness, in which there is no man,
\bibleverse{27} to satisfy the waste and desolate ground, to cause the
tender grass to grow? \bibleverse{28} Does the rain have a father? Or
who fathers the drops of dew? \bibleverse{29} Whose womb did the ice
come out of? Who has given birth to the gray frost of the sky?
\bibleverse{30} The waters become hard like stone, when the surface of
the deep is frozen. \bibleverse{31} ``Can you bind the cluster of the
Pleiades, or loosen the cords of Orion? \bibleverse{32} Can you lead the
constellations out in their season? Or can you guide the Bear with her
cubs? \bibleverse{33} Do you know the laws of the heavens? Can you
establish its dominion over the earth? \bibleverse{34} ``Can you lift up
your voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover you?
\bibleverse{35} Can you send out lightnings, that they may go? Do they
report to you, `Here we are'? \bibleverse{36} Who has put wisdom in the
inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the mind?
\bibleverse{37} Who can count the clouds by wisdom? Or who can pour out
the containers of the sky, \bibleverse{38} when the dust runs into a
mass, and the clods of earth stick together? \bibleverse{39} ``Can you
hunt the prey for the lioness, or satisfy the appetite of the young
lions, \bibleverse{40} when they crouch in their dens, and lie in wait
in the thicket? \bibleverse{41} Who provides for the raven his prey,
when his young ones cry to God, and wander for lack of food?

\hypertarget{section-38}{%
\section{39}\label{section-38}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Do you know the time when the mountain goats give
birth? Do you watch when the doe bears fawns? \bibleverse{2} Can you
count the months that they fulfill? Or do you know the time when they
give birth? \bibleverse{3} They bow themselves. They bear their young.
They end their labor pains. \bibleverse{4} Their young ones become
strong. They grow up in the open field. They go out, and don't return
again. \bibleverse{5} ``Who has set the wild donkey free? Or who has
loosened the bonds of the swift donkey, \bibleverse{6} whose home I have
made the wilderness, and the salt land his dwelling place?
\bibleverse{7} He scorns the tumult of the city, neither does he hear
the shouting of the driver. \bibleverse{8} The range of the mountains is
his pasture. He searches after every green thing. \bibleverse{9} ``Will
the wild ox be content to serve you? Or will he stay by your feeding
trough? \bibleverse{10} Can you hold the wild ox in the furrow with his
harness? Or will he till the valleys after you? \bibleverse{11} Will you
trust him, because his strength is great? Or will you leave to him your
labor? \bibleverse{12} Will you confide in him, that he will bring home
your seed, and gather the grain of your threshing floor? \bibleverse{13}
``The wings of the ostrich wave proudly, but are they the feathers and
plumage of love? \bibleverse{14} For she leaves her eggs on the earth,
warms them in the dust, \bibleverse{15} and forgets that the foot may
crush them, or that the wild animal may trample them. \bibleverse{16}
She deals harshly with her young ones, as if they were not hers. Though
her labor is in vain, she is without fear, \bibleverse{17} because God
has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
understanding. \bibleverse{18} When she lifts up herself on high, she
scorns the horse and his rider. \bibleverse{19} ``Have you given the
horse might? Have you clothed his neck with a quivering mane?
\bibleverse{20} Have you made him to leap as a locust? The glory of his
snorting is awesome. \bibleverse{21} He paws in the valley, and rejoices
in his strength. He goes out to meet the armed men. \bibleverse{22} He
mocks at fear, and is not dismayed, neither does he turn back from the
sword. \bibleverse{23} The quiver rattles against him, the flashing
spear and the javelin. \bibleverse{24} He eats up the ground with
fierceness and rage, neither does he stand still at the sound of the
trumpet. \bibleverse{25} As often as the trumpet sounds he snorts,
`Aha!' He smells the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and
the shouting. \bibleverse{26} ``Is it by your wisdom that the hawk
soars, and stretches her wings toward the south? \bibleverse{27} Is it
at your command that the eagle mounts up, and makes his nest on high?
\bibleverse{28} On the cliff he dwells and makes his home, on the point
of the cliff and the stronghold. \bibleverse{29} From there he spies out
the prey. His eyes see it afar off. \bibleverse{30} His young ones also
suck up blood. Where the slain are, there he is.''

\hypertarget{section-39}{%
\section{40}\label{section-39}}

\bibleverse{1} Moreover Yahweh answered Job, \bibleverse{2} ``Shall he
who argues contend with the Almighty? He who argues with God, let him
answer it.''

\bibleverse{3} Then Job answered Yahweh, \bibleverse{4} ``Behold, I am
of small account. What will I answer you? I lay my hand on my mouth.
\bibleverse{5} I have spoken once, and I will not answer; Yes, twice,
but I will proceed no further.''

\bibleverse{6} Then Yahweh answered Job out of the whirlwind:
\bibleverse{7} ``Now brace yourself like a man. I will question you, and
you will answer me. \bibleverse{8} Will you even annul my judgment? Will
you condemn me, that you may be justified? \bibleverse{9} Or do you have
an arm like God? Can you thunder with a voice like him? \bibleverse{10}
``Now deck yourself with excellency and dignity. Array yourself with
honor and majesty. \bibleverse{11} Pour out the fury of your anger. Look
at everyone who is proud, and bring him low. \bibleverse{12} Look at
everyone who is proud, and humble him. Crush the wicked in their place.
\bibleverse{13} Hide them in the dust together. Bind their faces in the
hidden place. \bibleverse{14} Then I will also admit to you that your
own right hand can save you. \bibleverse{15} ``See now behemoth, which I
made as well as you. He eats grass as an ox. \bibleverse{16} Look now,
his strength is in his thighs. His force is in the muscles of his belly.
\bibleverse{17} He moves his tail like a cedar. The sinews of his thighs
are knit together. \bibleverse{18} His bones are like tubes of bronze.
His limbs are like bars of iron. \bibleverse{19} He is the chief of the
ways of God. He who made him gives him his sword. \bibleverse{20} Surely
the mountains produce food for him, where all the animals of the field
play. \bibleverse{21} He lies under the lotus trees, in the covert of
the reed, and the marsh. \bibleverse{22} The lotuses cover him with
their shade. The willows of the brook surround him. \bibleverse{23}
Behold, if a river overflows, he doesn't tremble. He is confident,
though the Jordan swells even to his mouth. \bibleverse{24} Shall any
take him when he is on the watch, or pierce through his nose with a
snare?

\hypertarget{section-40}{%
\section{41}\label{section-40}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Can you draw out Leviathan\footnote{\textbf{41:1}
  Leviathan is a name for a crocodile or similar creature.} with a fish
hook, or press down his tongue with a cord? \bibleverse{2} Can you put a
rope into his nose, or pierce his jaw through with a hook?
\bibleverse{3} Will he make many petitions to you, or will he speak soft
words to you? \bibleverse{4} Will he make a covenant with you, that you
should take him for a servant forever? \bibleverse{5} Will you play with
him as with a bird? Or will you bind him for your girls? \bibleverse{6}
Will traders barter for him? Will they part him among the merchants?
\bibleverse{7} Can you fill his skin with barbed irons, or his head with
fish spears? \bibleverse{8} Lay your hand on him. Remember the battle,
and do so no more. \bibleverse{9} Behold, the hope of him is in vain.
Won't one be cast down even at the sight of him? \bibleverse{10} None is
so fierce that he dare stir him up. Who then is he who can stand before
me? \bibleverse{11} Who has first given to me, that I should repay him?
Everything under the heavens is mine. \bibleverse{12} ``I will not keep
silence concerning his limbs, nor his mighty strength, nor his goodly
frame. \bibleverse{13} Who can strip off his outer garment? Who will
come within his jaws? \bibleverse{14} Who can open the doors of his
face? Around his teeth is terror. \bibleverse{15} Strong scales are his
pride, shut up together with a close seal. \bibleverse{16} One is so
near to another, that no air can come between them. \bibleverse{17} They
are joined to one another. They stick together, so that they can't be
pulled apart. \bibleverse{18} His sneezing flashes out light. His eyes
are like the eyelids of the morning. \bibleverse{19} Out of his mouth go
burning torches. Sparks of fire leap out. \bibleverse{20} Out of his
nostrils a smoke goes, as of a boiling pot over a fire of reeds.
\bibleverse{21} His breath kindles coals. A flame goes out of his mouth.
\bibleverse{22} There is strength in his neck. Terror dances before him.
\bibleverse{23} The flakes of his flesh are joined together. They are
firm on him. They can't be moved. \bibleverse{24} His heart is as firm
as a stone, yes, firm as the lower millstone. \bibleverse{25} When he
raises himself up, the mighty are afraid. They retreat before his
thrashing. \bibleverse{26} If one attacks him with the sword, it can't
prevail; nor the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft. \bibleverse{27}
He counts iron as straw, and bronze as rotten wood. \bibleverse{28} The
arrow can't make him flee. Sling stones are like chaff to him.
\bibleverse{29} Clubs are counted as stubble. He laughs at the rushing
of the javelin. \bibleverse{30} His undersides are like sharp potsherds,
leaving a trail in the mud like a threshing sledge. \bibleverse{31} He
makes the deep to boil like a pot. He makes the sea like a pot of
ointment. \bibleverse{32} He makes a path shine after him. One would
think the deep had white hair. \bibleverse{33} On earth there is not his
equal, that is made without fear. \bibleverse{34} He sees everything
that is high. He is king over all the sons of pride.''

\hypertarget{section-41}{%
\section{42}\label{section-41}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Job answered Yahweh: \bibleverse{2} ``I know that
you can do all things, and that no purpose of yours can be restrained.
\bibleverse{3} You asked, `Who is this who hides counsel without
knowledge?' therefore I have uttered that which I didn't understand,
things too wonderful for me, which I didn't know. \bibleverse{4} You
said, `Listen, now, and I will speak; I will question you, and you will
answer me.' \bibleverse{5} I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear,
but now my eye sees you. \bibleverse{6} Therefore I abhor myself, and
repent in dust and ashes.''

\bibleverse{7} It was so, that after Yahweh had spoken these words to
Job, Yahweh said to Eliphaz the Temanite, ``My wrath is kindled against
you, and against your two friends; for you have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, as my servant Job has. \bibleverse{8} Now
therefore, take to yourselves seven bulls and seven rams, and go to my
servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my
servant Job shall pray for you, for I will accept him, that I not deal
with you according to your folly. For you have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, as my servant Job has.''

\bibleverse{9} So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar
the Naamathite went and did what Yahweh commanded them, and Yahweh
accepted Job.

\bibleverse{10} Yahweh restored Job's prosperity when he prayed for his
friends. Yahweh gave Job twice as much as he had before. \bibleverse{11}
Then all his brothers, all his sisters, and all those who had been of
his acquaintance before, came to him and ate bread with him in his
house. They comforted him, and consoled him concerning all the evil that
Yahweh had brought on him. Everyone also gave him a piece of
money,\footnote{\textbf{42:11} literally, kesitah, a unit of money,
  probably silver} and everyone a ring of gold.

\bibleverse{12} So Yahweh blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning. He had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, one
thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand female donkeys. \bibleverse{13} He
had also seven sons and three daughters. \bibleverse{14} He called the
name of the first, Jemimah; and the name of the second, Keziah; and the
name of the third, Keren Happuch. \bibleverse{15} In all the land were
no women found so beautiful as the daughters of Job. Their father gave
them an inheritance among their brothers. \bibleverse{16} After this Job
lived one hundred forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, to
four generations. \bibleverse{17} So Job died, being old and full of
days.
