\hypertarget{indication-of-the-purpose-of-the-writes}{%
\subsection{Indication of the purpose of the
writes}\label{indication-of-the-purpose-of-the-writes}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of
Israel: \bibleverse{2} to know wisdom and instruction; to discern the
words of understanding; \bibleverse{3} to receive instruction in wise
dealing, in righteousness, justice, and equity; \bibleverse{4} to give
prudence to the simple, knowledge and discretion to the young man---
\bibleverse{5} that the wise man may hear, and increase in learning;
that the man of understanding may attain to sound counsel;
\bibleverse{6} to understand a proverb and parables, the words and
riddles of the wise. \bibleverse{7} The fear of Yahweh\footnote{\textbf{1:7}
  ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name, sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}''
  (all caps) in other translations.} is the beginning of knowledge, but
the foolish despise wisdom and instruction.

\hypertarget{invitation-to-voluntary-obedience-warning-against-seduction-especially-before-engaging-in-acts-of-violence}{%
\subsection{Invitation to voluntary obedience; Warning against
seduction, especially before engaging in acts of
violence}\label{invitation-to-voluntary-obedience-warning-against-seduction-especially-before-engaging-in-acts-of-violence}}

\bibleverse{8} My son, listen to your father's instruction, and don't
forsake your mother's teaching; \bibleverse{9} for they will be a
garland to grace your head, and chains around your neck. \bibleverse{10}
My son, if sinners entice you, don't consent. \bibleverse{11} If they
say, ``Come with us. Let's lie in wait for blood. Let's lurk secretly
for the innocent without cause. \bibleverse{12} Let's swallow them up
alive like Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{1:12} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
and whole, like those who go down into the pit. \bibleverse{13} We'll
find all valuable wealth. We'll fill our houses with plunder.
\bibleverse{14} You shall cast your lot among us. We'll all have one
purse''--- \bibleverse{15} my son, don't walk on the path with them.
Keep your foot from their path, \bibleverse{16} for their feet run to
evil. They hurry to shed blood. \bibleverse{17} For the net is spread in
vain in the sight of any bird; \bibleverse{18} but these lay in wait for
their own blood. They lurk secretly for their own lives. \bibleverse{19}
So are the ways of everyone who is greedy for gain. It takes away the
life of its owners.

\hypertarget{wisdoms-call-to-willingly-obey-her-commandments-threats-to-the-reluctant}{%
\subsection{Wisdom's call to willingly obey her commandments; Threats to
the
Reluctant}\label{wisdoms-call-to-willingly-obey-her-commandments-threats-to-the-reluctant}}

\bibleverse{20} Wisdom calls aloud in the street. She utters her voice
in the public squares. \bibleverse{21} She calls at the head of noisy
places. At the entrance of the city gates, she utters her words:
\bibleverse{22} ``How long, you simple ones, will you love simplicity?
How long will mockers delight themselves in mockery, and fools hate
knowledge? \bibleverse{23} Turn at my reproof. Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:23}
  ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice,
  observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} I will
pour out my spirit on you. I will make known my words to you.
\bibleverse{24} Because I have called, and you have refused; I have
stretched out my hand, and no one has paid attention; \bibleverse{25}
but you have ignored all my counsel, and wanted none of my reproof;
\bibleverse{26} I also will laugh at your disaster. I will mock when
calamity overtakes you, \bibleverse{27} when calamity overtakes you like
a storm, when your disaster comes on like a whirlwind, when distress and
anguish come on you. \bibleverse{28} Then they will call on me, but I
will not answer. They will seek me diligently, but they will not find
me, \bibleverse{29} because they hated knowledge, and didn't choose the
fear of Yahweh. \bibleverse{30} They wanted none of my counsel. They
despised all my reproof. \bibleverse{31} Therefore they will eat of the
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own schemes.
\bibleverse{32} For the backsliding of the simple will kill them. The
careless ease of fools will destroy them. \bibleverse{33} But whoever
listens to me will dwell securely, and will be at ease, without fear of
harm.''

\hypertarget{the-blessings-of-diligently-seeking-wisdom}{%
\subsection{The blessings of diligently seeking
wisdom}\label{the-blessings-of-diligently-seeking-wisdom}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, if you will receive my words, and store up my
commandments within you, \bibleverse{2} so as to turn your ear to
wisdom, and apply your heart to understanding; \bibleverse{3} yes, if
you call out for discernment, and lift up your voice for understanding;
\bibleverse{4} if you seek her as silver, and search for her as for
hidden treasures; \bibleverse{5} then you will understand the fear of
Yahweh, and find the knowledge of God.\footnote{\textbf{2:5} The Hebrew
  word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} \bibleverse{6}
For Yahweh gives wisdom. Out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. \bibleverse{7} He lays up sound wisdom for the upright.
He is a shield to those who walk in integrity, \bibleverse{8} that he
may guard the paths of justice, and preserve the way of his saints.
\bibleverse{9} Then you will understand righteousness and justice,
equity and every good path. \bibleverse{10} For wisdom will enter into
your heart. Knowledge will be pleasant to your soul. \bibleverse{11}
Discretion will watch over you. Understanding will keep you,
\bibleverse{12} to deliver you from the way of evil, from the men who
speak perverse things, \bibleverse{13} who forsake the paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness, \bibleverse{14} who
rejoice to do evil, and delight in the perverseness of evil,
\bibleverse{15} who are crooked in their ways, and wayward in their
paths, \bibleverse{16} to deliver you from the strange woman, even from
the foreigner who flatters with her words, \bibleverse{17} who forsakes
the friend of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God;
\bibleverse{18} for her house leads down to death, her paths to the
departed spirits. \bibleverse{19} None who go to her return again,
neither do they attain to the paths of life. \bibleverse{20} Therefore
walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.
\bibleverse{21} For the upright will dwell in the land. The perfect will
remain in it. \bibleverse{22} But the wicked will be cut off from the
land. The treacherous will be rooted out of it.

\hypertarget{warnings-about-the-fear-of-god-and-moral-behavior-with-reference-to-the-expected-reward}{%
\subsection{Warnings about the fear of God and moral behavior with
reference to the expected
reward}\label{warnings-about-the-fear-of-god-and-moral-behavior-with-reference-to-the-expected-reward}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, don't forget my teaching, but let your heart keep
my commandments, \bibleverse{2} for they will add to you length of days,
years of life, and peace. \bibleverse{3} Don't let kindness and truth
forsake you. Bind them around your neck. Write them on the tablet of
your heart. \bibleverse{4} So you will find favor, and good
understanding in the sight of God and man. \bibleverse{5} Trust in
Yahweh with all your heart, and don't lean on your own understanding.
\bibleverse{6} In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make your
paths straight. \bibleverse{7} Don't be wise in your own eyes. Fear
Yahweh, and depart from evil. \bibleverse{8} It will be health to your
body, and nourishment to your bones. \bibleverse{9} Honor Yahweh with
your substance, with the first fruits of all your increase;
\bibleverse{10} so your barns will be filled with plenty, and your vats
will overflow with new wine. \bibleverse{11} My son, don't despise
Yahweh's discipline, neither be weary of his correction; \bibleverse{12}
for whom Yahweh loves, he corrects, even as a father reproves the son in
whom he delights.

\hypertarget{courage-and-blessing-of-wisdom}{%
\subsection{Courage and blessing of
wisdom}\label{courage-and-blessing-of-wisdom}}

\bibleverse{13} Happy is the man who finds wisdom, the man who gets
understanding. \bibleverse{14} For her good profit is better than
getting silver, and her return is better than fine gold. \bibleverse{15}
She is more precious than rubies. None of the things you can desire are
to be compared to her. \bibleverse{16} Length of days is in her right
hand. In her left hand are riches and honor. \bibleverse{17} Her ways
are ways of pleasantness. All her paths are peace. \bibleverse{18} She
is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her. Happy is everyone who
retains her. \bibleverse{19} By wisdom Yahweh founded the earth. By
understanding, he established the heavens. \bibleverse{20} By his
knowledge, the depths were broken up, and the skies drop down the dew.
\bibleverse{21} My son, let them not depart from your eyes. Keep sound
wisdom and discretion, \bibleverse{22} so they will be life to your
soul, and grace for your neck. \bibleverse{23} Then you shall walk in
your way securely. Your foot won't stumble. \bibleverse{24} When you lie
down, you will not be afraid. Yes, you will lie down, and your sleep
will be sweet. \bibleverse{25} Don't be afraid of sudden fear, neither
of the desolation of the wicked, when it comes; \bibleverse{26} for
Yahweh will be your confidence, and will keep your foot from being
taken.

\hypertarget{warnings-against-lack-of-love-towards-others-and-against-violence}{%
\subsection{Warnings against lack of love towards others and against
violence}\label{warnings-against-lack-of-love-towards-others-and-against-violence}}

\bibleverse{27} Don't withhold good from those to whom it is due, when
it is in the power of your hand to do it. \bibleverse{28} Don't say to
your neighbor, ``Go, and come again; tomorrow I will give it to you,''
when you have it by you. \bibleverse{29} Don't devise evil against your
neighbor, since he dwells securely by you. \bibleverse{30} Don't strive
with a man without cause, if he has done you no harm. \bibleverse{31}
Don't envy the man of violence. Choose none of his ways. \bibleverse{32}
For the perverse is an abomination to Yahweh, but his friendship is with
the upright. \bibleverse{33} Yahweh's curse is in the house of the
wicked, but he blesses the habitation of the righteous. \bibleverse{34}
Surely he mocks the mockers, but he gives grace to the humble.
\bibleverse{35} The wise will inherit glory, but shame will be the
promotion of fools.

\hypertarget{parental-exhortation-to-seek-wisdom-and-obey-its-teachings}{%
\subsection{Parental exhortation to seek wisdom and obey its
teachings}\label{parental-exhortation-to-seek-wisdom-and-obey-its-teachings}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Listen, sons, to a father's instruction. Pay attention
and know understanding; \bibleverse{2} for I give you sound learning.
Don't forsake my law. \bibleverse{3} For I was a son to my father,
tender and an only child in the sight of my mother. \bibleverse{4} He
taught me, and said to me: ``Let your heart retain my words. Keep my
commandments, and live. \bibleverse{5} Get wisdom. Get understanding.
Don't forget, and don't deviate from the words of my mouth.
\bibleverse{6} Don't forsake her, and she will preserve you. Love her,
and she will keep you. \bibleverse{7} Wisdom is supreme. Get wisdom.
Yes, though it costs all your possessions, get understanding.
\bibleverse{8} Esteem her, and she will exalt you. She will bring you to
honor when you embrace her. \bibleverse{9} She will give to your head a
garland of grace. She will deliver a crown of splendor to you.''
\bibleverse{10} Listen, my son, and receive my sayings. The years of
your life will be many. \bibleverse{11} I have taught you in the way of
wisdom. I have led you in straight paths. \bibleverse{12} When you go,
your steps will not be hampered. When you run, you will not stumble.
\bibleverse{13} Take firm hold of instruction. Don't let her go. Keep
her, for she is your life. \bibleverse{14} Don't enter into the path of
the wicked. Don't walk in the way of evil men. \bibleverse{15} Avoid it,
and don't pass by it. Turn from it, and pass on. \bibleverse{16} For
they don't sleep unless they do evil. Their sleep is taken away, unless
they make someone fall. \bibleverse{17} For they eat the bread of
wickedness and drink the wine of violence. \bibleverse{18} But the path
of the righteous is like the dawning light that shines more and more
until the perfect day. \bibleverse{19} The way of the wicked is like
darkness. They don't know what they stumble over. \bibleverse{20} My
son, attend to my words. Turn your ear to my sayings. \bibleverse{21}
Let them not depart from your eyes. Keep them in the center of your
heart. \bibleverse{22} For they are life to those who find them, and
health to their whole body. \bibleverse{23} Keep your heart with all
diligence, for out of it is the wellspring of life. \bibleverse{24} Put
away from yourself a perverse mouth. Put corrupt lips far from you.
\bibleverse{25} Let your eyes look straight ahead. Fix your gaze
directly before you. \bibleverse{26} Make the path of your feet level.
Let all of your ways be established. \bibleverse{27} Don't turn to the
right hand nor to the left. Remove your foot from evil.

\hypertarget{warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses-praise-of-married-life}{%
\subsection{Warning against intercourse with adulteresses; Praise of
married
life}\label{warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses-praise-of-married-life}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Turn your ear to my
understanding, \bibleverse{2} that you may maintain discretion, that
your lips may preserve knowledge. \bibleverse{3} For the lips of an
adulteress drip honey. Her mouth is smoother than oil, \bibleverse{4}
but in the end she is as bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a two-edged
sword. \bibleverse{5} Her feet go down to death. Her steps lead straight
to Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{5:5} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
\bibleverse{6} She gives no thought to the way of life. Her ways are
crooked, and she doesn't know it. \bibleverse{7} Now therefore, my sons,
listen to me. Don't depart from the words of my mouth. \bibleverse{8}
Remove your way far from her. Don't come near the door of her house,
\bibleverse{9} lest you give your honor to others, and your years to the
cruel one; \bibleverse{10} lest strangers feast on your wealth, and your
labors enrich another man's house. \bibleverse{11} You will groan at
your latter end, when your flesh and your body are consumed,
\bibleverse{12} and say, ``How I have hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof. \bibleverse{13} I haven't obeyed the voice of my
teachers, nor turned my ear to those who instructed me! \bibleverse{14}
I have come to the brink of utter ruin, among the gathered assembly.''
\bibleverse{15} Drink water out of your own cistern, running water out
of your own well. \bibleverse{16} Should your springs overflow in the
streets, streams of water in the public squares? \bibleverse{17} Let
them be for yourself alone, not for strangers with you. \bibleverse{18}
Let your spring be blessed. Rejoice in the wife of your youth.
\bibleverse{19} A loving doe and a graceful deer--- let her breasts
satisfy you at all times. Be captivated always with her love.
\bibleverse{20} For why should you, my son, be captivated with an
adulteress? Why embrace the bosom of another? \bibleverse{21} For the
ways of man are before Yahweh's eyes. He examines all his paths.
\bibleverse{22} The evil deeds of the wicked ensnare him. The cords of
his sin hold him firmly. \bibleverse{23} He will die for lack of
instruction. In the greatness of his folly, he will go astray.

\hypertarget{warnings-about-security-indolence-falsehood-and-all-ungodly-beings}{%
\subsection{Warnings about security, indolence, falsehood and all
ungodly
beings}\label{warnings-about-security-indolence-falsehood-and-all-ungodly-beings}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, if you have become collateral for your neighbor,
if you have struck your hands in pledge for a stranger, \bibleverse{2}
you are trapped by the words of your mouth; you are ensnared with the
words of your mouth. \bibleverse{3} Do this now, my son, and deliver
yourself, since you have come into the hand of your neighbor. Go, humble
yourself. Press your plea with your neighbor. \bibleverse{4} Give no
sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids. \bibleverse{5} Free
yourself, like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter, like a bird from
the snare of the fowler. \bibleverse{6} Go to the ant, you sluggard.
Consider her ways, and be wise; \bibleverse{7} which having no chief,
overseer, or ruler, \bibleverse{8} provides her bread in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. \bibleverse{9} How long will you sleep,
sluggard? When will you arise out of your sleep? \bibleverse{10} A
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep--- \bibleverse{11} so your poverty will come as a robber, and your
scarcity as an armed man. \bibleverse{12} A worthless person, a man of
iniquity, is he who walks with a perverse mouth, \bibleverse{13} who
winks with his eyes, who signals with his feet, who motions with his
fingers, \bibleverse{14} in whose heart is perverseness, who devises
evil continually, who always sows discord. \bibleverse{15} Therefore his
calamity will come suddenly. He will be broken suddenly, and that
without remedy. \bibleverse{16} There are six things which Yahweh hates;
yes, seven which are an abomination to him: \bibleverse{17} arrogant
eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, \bibleverse{18} a
heart that devises wicked schemes, feet that are swift in running to
mischief, \bibleverse{19} a false witness who utters lies, and he who
sows discord among brothers.

\hypertarget{another-warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses}{%
\subsection{Another warning against intercourse with
adulteresses}\label{another-warning-against-intercourse-with-adulteresses}}

\bibleverse{20} My son, keep your father's commandment, and don't
forsake your mother's teaching. \bibleverse{21} Bind them continually on
your heart. Tie them around your neck. \bibleverse{22} When you walk, it
will lead you. When you sleep, it will watch over you. When you awake,
it will talk with you. \bibleverse{23} For the commandment is a lamp,
and the law is light. Reproofs of instruction are the way of life,
\bibleverse{24} to keep you from the immoral woman, from the flattery of
the wayward wife's tongue. \bibleverse{25} Don't lust after her beauty
in your heart, neither let her captivate you with her eyelids.
\bibleverse{26} For a prostitute reduces you to a piece of bread. The
adulteress hunts for your precious life. \bibleverse{27} Can a man scoop
fire into his lap, and his clothes not be burned? \bibleverse{28} Or can
one walk on hot coals, and his feet not be scorched? \bibleverse{29} So
is he who goes in to his neighbor's wife. Whoever touches her will not
be unpunished. \bibleverse{30} Men don't despise a thief if he steals to
satisfy himself when he is hungry, \bibleverse{31} but if he is found,
he shall restore seven times. He shall give all the wealth of his house.
\bibleverse{32} He who commits adultery with a woman is void of
understanding. He who does it destroys his own soul. \bibleverse{33} He
will get wounds and dishonor. His reproach will not be wiped away.
\bibleverse{34} For jealousy arouses the fury of the husband. He won't
spare in the day of vengeance. \bibleverse{35} He won't regard any
ransom, neither will he rest content, though you give many gifts.

\hypertarget{description-of-seduction-to-adulterous-fornication-warning-of-its-dire-consequences}{%
\subsection{Description of seduction to adulterous fornication; Warning
of its dire
consequences}\label{description-of-seduction-to-adulterous-fornication-warning-of-its-dire-consequences}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} My son, keep my words. Lay up my commandments within you.
\bibleverse{2} Keep my commandments and live! Guard my teaching as the
apple of your eye. \bibleverse{3} Bind them on your fingers. Write them
on the tablet of your heart. \bibleverse{4} Tell wisdom, ``You are my
sister.'' Call understanding your relative, \bibleverse{5} that they may
keep you from the strange woman, from the foreigner who flatters with
her words. \bibleverse{6} For at the window of my house, I looked out
through my lattice. \bibleverse{7} I saw among the simple ones. I
discerned among the youths a young man void of understanding,
\bibleverse{8} passing through the street near her corner, he went the
way to her house, \bibleverse{9} in the twilight, in the evening of the
day, in the middle of the night and in the darkness. \bibleverse{10}
Behold, there a woman met him with the attire of a prostitute, and with
crafty intent. \bibleverse{11} She is loud and defiant. Her feet don't
stay in her house. \bibleverse{12} Now she is in the streets, now in the
squares, and lurking at every corner. \bibleverse{13} So she caught him,
and kissed him. With an impudent face she said to him: \bibleverse{14}
``Sacrifices of peace offerings are with me. Today I have paid my vows.
\bibleverse{15} Therefore I came out to meet you, to diligently seek
your face, and I have found you. \bibleverse{16} I have spread my couch
with carpets of tapestry, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.
\bibleverse{17} I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
\bibleverse{18} Come, let's take our fill of loving until the morning.
Let's solace ourselves with loving. \bibleverse{19} For my husband isn't
at home. He has gone on a long journey. \bibleverse{20} He has taken a
bag of money with him. He will come home at the full moon.''
\bibleverse{21} With persuasive words, she led him astray. With the
flattering of her lips, she seduced him. \bibleverse{22} He followed her
immediately, as an ox goes to the slaughter, as a fool stepping into a
noose. \bibleverse{23} Until an arrow strikes through his liver, as a
bird hurries to the snare, and doesn't know that it will cost his life.
\bibleverse{24} Now therefore, sons, listen to me. Pay attention to the
words of my mouth. \bibleverse{25} Don't let your heart turn to her
ways. Don't go astray in her paths, \bibleverse{26} for she has thrown
down many wounded. Yes, all her slain are a mighty army. \bibleverse{27}
Her house is the way to Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{7:27} Sheol is the place
  of the dead.} going down to the rooms of death.

\hypertarget{invitation-and-self-recommendation-of-wisdom-as-a-teacher}{%
\subsection{Invitation and self-recommendation of wisdom as a
teacher}\label{invitation-and-self-recommendation-of-wisdom-as-a-teacher}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Doesn't wisdom cry out? Doesn't understanding raise her
voice? \bibleverse{2} On the top of high places by the way, where the
paths meet, she stands. \bibleverse{3} Beside the gates, at the entry of
the city, at the entry doors, she cries aloud: \bibleverse{4} ``I call
to you men! I send my voice to the sons of mankind. \bibleverse{5} You
simple, understand prudence! You fools, be of an understanding heart!
\bibleverse{6} Hear, for I will speak excellent things. The opening of
my lips is for right things. \bibleverse{7} For my mouth speaks truth.
Wickedness is an abomination to my lips. \bibleverse{8} All the words of
my mouth are in righteousness. There is nothing crooked or perverse in
them. \bibleverse{9} They are all plain to him who understands, right to
those who find knowledge. \bibleverse{10} Receive my instruction rather
than silver, knowledge rather than choice gold. \bibleverse{11} For
wisdom is better than rubies. All the things that may be desired can't
be compared to it. \bibleverse{12} ``I, wisdom, have made prudence my
dwelling. Find out knowledge and discretion. \bibleverse{13} The fear of
Yahweh is to hate evil. I hate pride, arrogance, the evil way, and the
perverse mouth. \bibleverse{14} Counsel and sound knowledge are mine. I
have understanding and power. \bibleverse{15} By me kings reign, and
princes decree justice. \bibleverse{16} By me princes rule, nobles, and
all the righteous rulers of the earth. \bibleverse{17} I love those who
love me. Those who seek me diligently will find me. \bibleverse{18} With
me are riches, honor, enduring wealth, and prosperity. \bibleverse{19}
My fruit is better than gold, yes, than fine gold, my yield than choice
silver. \bibleverse{20} I walk in the way of righteousness, in the
middle of the paths of justice, \bibleverse{21} that I may give wealth
to those who love me. I fill their treasuries.

\hypertarget{wisdom-as-the-first-and-most-excellent-creature-of-god}{%
\subsection{Wisdom as the first and most excellent creature of
God}\label{wisdom-as-the-first-and-most-excellent-creature-of-god}}

\bibleverse{22} ``Yahweh possessed me in the beginning of his work,
before his deeds of old. \bibleverse{23} I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, before the earth existed. \bibleverse{24} When there
were no depths, I was born, when there were no springs abounding with
water. \bibleverse{25} Before the mountains were settled in place,
before the hills, I was born; \bibleverse{26} while as yet he had not
made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the
world. \bibleverse{27} When he established the heavens, I was there.
When he set a circle on the surface of the deep, \bibleverse{28} when he
established the clouds above, when the springs of the deep became
strong, \bibleverse{29} when he gave to the sea its boundary, that the
waters should not violate his commandment, when he marked out the
foundations of the earth, \bibleverse{30} then I was the craftsman by
his side. I was a delight day by day, always rejoicing before him,
\bibleverse{31} rejoicing in his whole world. My delight was with the
sons of men.

\hypertarget{reminder-and-warning}{%
\subsection{Reminder and warning}\label{reminder-and-warning}}

\bibleverse{32} ``Now therefore, my sons, listen to me, for blessed are
those who keep my ways. \bibleverse{33} Hear instruction, and be wise.
Don't refuse it. \bibleverse{34} Blessed is the man who hears me,
watching daily at my gates, waiting at my door posts. \bibleverse{35}
For whoever finds me finds life, and will obtain favor from Yahweh.
\bibleverse{36} But he who sins against me wrongs his own soul. All
those who hate me love death.''

\hypertarget{mrs.-wisdom-and-mrs.-madness-invite-guests}{%
\subsection{Mrs. Wisdom and Mrs. Madness invite
guests}\label{mrs.-wisdom-and-mrs.-madness-invite-guests}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} Wisdom has built her house. She has carved out her seven
pillars. \bibleverse{2} She has prepared her meat. She has mixed her
wine. She has also set her table. \bibleverse{3} She has sent out her
maidens. She cries from the highest places of the city: \bibleverse{4}
``Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!'' As for him who is void of
understanding, she says to him, \bibleverse{5} ``Come, eat some of my
bread, Drink some of the wine which I have mixed! \bibleverse{6} Leave
your simple ways, and live. Walk in the way of understanding.''
\bibleverse{7} One who corrects a mocker invites insult. One who
reproves a wicked man invites abuse. \bibleverse{8} Don't reprove a
scoffer, lest he hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.
\bibleverse{9} Instruct a wise person, and he will be still wiser. Teach
a righteous person, and he will increase in learning. \bibleverse{10}
The fear of Yahweh is the beginning of wisdom. The knowledge of the Holy
One is understanding. \bibleverse{11} For by me your days will be
multiplied. The years of your life will be increased. \bibleverse{12} If
you are wise, you are wise for yourself. If you mock, you alone will
bear it.

\hypertarget{the-invitation-to-madness}{%
\subsection{The invitation to madness}\label{the-invitation-to-madness}}

\bibleverse{13} The foolish woman is loud, undisciplined, and knows
nothing. \bibleverse{14} She sits at the door of her house, on a seat in
the high places of the city, \bibleverse{15} to call to those who pass
by, who go straight on their ways, \bibleverse{16} ``Whoever is simple,
let him turn in here.'' As for him who is void of understanding, she
says to him, \bibleverse{17} ``Stolen water is sweet. Food eaten in
secret is pleasant.'' \bibleverse{18} But he doesn't know that the
departed spirits are there, that her guests are in the depths of
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{9:18} Sheol is the place of the dead.}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes a glad father;
but a foolish son brings grief to his mother. \bibleverse{2} Treasures
of wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivers from death.
\bibleverse{3} Yahweh will not allow the soul of the righteous to go
hungry, but he thrusts away the desire of the wicked. \bibleverse{4} He
becomes poor who works with a lazy hand, but the hand of the diligent
brings wealth. \bibleverse{5} He who gathers in summer is a wise son,
but he who sleeps during the harvest is a son who causes shame.
\bibleverse{6} Blessings are on the head of the righteous, but violence
covers the mouth of the wicked. \bibleverse{7} The memory of the
righteous is blessed, but the name of the wicked will rot.
\bibleverse{8} The wise in heart accept commandments, but a chattering
fool will fall. \bibleverse{9} He who walks blamelessly walks surely,
but he who perverts his ways will be found out. \bibleverse{10} One who
winks with the eye causes sorrow, but a chattering fool will fall.
\bibleverse{11} The mouth of the righteous is a spring of life, but
violence covers the mouth of the wicked. \bibleverse{12} Hatred stirs up
strife, but love covers all wrongs. \bibleverse{13} Wisdom is found on
the lips of him who has discernment, but a rod is for the back of him
who is void of understanding. \bibleverse{14} Wise men lay up knowledge,
but the mouth of the foolish is near ruin. \bibleverse{15} The rich
man's wealth is his strong city. The destruction of the poor is their
poverty. \bibleverse{16} The labor of the righteous leads to life. The
increase of the wicked leads to sin. \bibleverse{17} He is in the way of
life who heeds correction, but he who forsakes reproof leads others
astray. \bibleverse{18} He who hides hatred has lying lips. He who
utters a slander is a fool. \bibleverse{19} In the multitude of words
there is no lack of disobedience, but he who restrains his lips does
wisely. \bibleverse{20} The tongue of the righteous is like choice
silver. The heart of the wicked is of little worth. \bibleverse{21} The
lips of the righteous feed many, but the foolish die for lack of
understanding. \bibleverse{22} Yahweh's blessing brings wealth, and he
adds no trouble to it. \bibleverse{23} It is a fool's pleasure to do
wickedness, but wisdom is a man of understanding's pleasure.
\bibleverse{24} What the wicked fear will overtake them, but the desire
of the righteous will be granted. \bibleverse{25} When the whirlwind
passes, the wicked is no more; but the righteous stand firm forever.
\bibleverse{26} As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is
the sluggard to those who send him. \bibleverse{27} The fear of Yahweh
prolongs days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
\bibleverse{28} The prospect of the righteous is joy, but the hope of
the wicked will perish. \bibleverse{29} The way of Yahweh is a
stronghold to the upright, but it is a destruction to the workers of
iniquity. \bibleverse{30} The righteous will never be removed, but the
wicked will not dwell in the land. \bibleverse{31} The mouth of the
righteous produces wisdom, but the perverse tongue will be cut off.
\bibleverse{32} The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, but
the mouth of the wicked is perverse.

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} A false balance is an abomination to Yahweh, but accurate
weights are his delight. \bibleverse{2} When pride comes, then comes
shame, but with humility comes wisdom. \bibleverse{3} The integrity of
the upright shall guide them, but the perverseness of the treacherous
shall destroy them. \bibleverse{4} Riches don't profit in the day of
wrath, but righteousness delivers from death. \bibleverse{5} The
righteousness of the blameless will direct his way, but the wicked shall
fall by his own wickedness. \bibleverse{6} The righteousness of the
upright shall deliver them, but the unfaithful will be trapped by evil
desires. \bibleverse{7} When a wicked man dies, hope perishes, and
expectation of power comes to nothing. \bibleverse{8} A righteous person
is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked takes his place.
\bibleverse{9} With his mouth the godless man destroys his neighbor, but
the righteous will be delivered through knowledge. \bibleverse{10} When
it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices. When the wicked
perish, there is shouting. \bibleverse{11} By the blessing of the
upright, the city is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the
wicked. \bibleverse{12} One who despises his neighbor is void of wisdom,
but a man of understanding holds his peace. \bibleverse{13} One who
brings gossip betrays a confidence, but one who is of a trustworthy
spirit is one who keeps a secret. \bibleverse{14} Where there is no wise
guidance, the nation falls, but in the multitude of counselors there is
victory. \bibleverse{15} He who is collateral for a stranger will suffer
for it, but he who refuses pledges of collateral is secure.
\bibleverse{16} A gracious woman obtains honor, but violent men obtain
riches. \bibleverse{17} The merciful man does good to his own soul, but
he who is cruel troubles his own flesh. \bibleverse{18} Wicked people
earn deceitful wages, but one who sows righteousness reaps a sure
reward. \bibleverse{19} He who is truly righteous gets life. He who
pursues evil gets death. \bibleverse{20} Those who are perverse in heart
are an abomination to Yahweh, but those whose ways are blameless are his
delight. \bibleverse{21} Most certainly, the evil man will not be
unpunished, but the offspring\footnote{\textbf{11:21} or, seed} of the
righteous will be delivered. \bibleverse{22} Like a gold ring in a pig's
snout, is a beautiful woman who lacks discretion. \bibleverse{23} The
desire of the righteous is only good. The expectation of the wicked is
wrath. \bibleverse{24} There is one who scatters, and increases yet
more. There is one who withholds more than is appropriate, but gains
poverty. \bibleverse{25} The liberal soul shall be made fat. He who
waters shall be watered also himself. \bibleverse{26} People curse
someone who withholds grain, but blessing will be on the head of him who
sells it. \bibleverse{27} He who diligently seeks good seeks favor, but
he who searches after evil, it shall come to him. \bibleverse{28} He who
trusts in his riches will fall, but the righteous shall flourish as the
green leaf. \bibleverse{29} He who troubles his own house shall inherit
the wind. The foolish shall be servant to the wise of heart.
\bibleverse{30} The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life. He who is
wise wins souls. \bibleverse{31} Behold, the righteous shall be repaid
in the earth, how much more the wicked and the sinner!

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Whoever loves correction loves knowledge, but he who
hates reproof is stupid. \bibleverse{2} A good man shall obtain favor
from Yahweh, but he will condemn a man of wicked plans. \bibleverse{3} A
man shall not be established by wickedness, but the root of the
righteous shall not be moved. \bibleverse{4} A worthy woman is the crown
of her husband, but a disgraceful wife is as rottenness in his bones.
\bibleverse{5} The thoughts of the righteous are just, but the advice of
the wicked is deceitful. \bibleverse{6} The words of the wicked are
about lying in wait for blood, but the speech of the upright rescues
them. \bibleverse{7} The wicked are overthrown, and are no more, but the
house of the righteous shall stand. \bibleverse{8} A man shall be
commended according to his wisdom, but he who has a warped mind shall be
despised. \bibleverse{9} Better is he who is little known, and has a
servant, than he who honors himself and lacks bread. \bibleverse{10} A
righteous man respects the life of his animal, but the tender mercies of
the wicked are cruel. \bibleverse{11} He who tills his land shall have
plenty of bread, but he who chases fantasies is void of understanding.
\bibleverse{12} The wicked desires the plunder of evil men, but the root
of the righteous flourishes. \bibleverse{13} An evil man is trapped by
sinfulness of lips, but the righteous shall come out of trouble.
\bibleverse{14} A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his
mouth. The work of a man's hands shall be rewarded to him.
\bibleverse{15} The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he who
is wise listens to counsel. \bibleverse{16} A fool shows his annoyance
the same day, but one who overlooks an insult is prudent.
\bibleverse{17} He who is truthful testifies honestly, but a false
witness lies. \bibleverse{18} There is one who speaks rashly like the
piercing of a sword, but the tongue of the wise heals. \bibleverse{19}
Truth's lips will be established forever, but a lying tongue is only
momentary. \bibleverse{20} Deceit is in the heart of those who plot
evil, but joy comes to the promoters of peace. \bibleverse{21} No
mischief shall happen to the righteous, but the wicked shall be filled
with evil. \bibleverse{22} Lying lips are an abomination to Yahweh, but
those who do the truth are his delight. \bibleverse{23} A prudent man
keeps his knowledge, but the hearts of fools proclaim foolishness.
\bibleverse{24} The hands of the diligent ones shall rule, but laziness
ends in slave labor. \bibleverse{25} Anxiety in a man's heart weighs it
down, but a kind word makes it glad. \bibleverse{26} A righteous person
is cautious in friendship, but the way of the wicked leads them astray.
\bibleverse{27} The slothful man doesn't roast his game, but the
possessions of diligent men are prized. \bibleverse{28} In the way of
righteousness is life; in its path there is no death.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} A wise son listens to his father's instruction, but a
scoffer doesn't listen to rebuke. \bibleverse{2} By the fruit of his
lips, a man enjoys good things, but the unfaithful crave violence.
\bibleverse{3} He who guards his mouth guards his soul. One who opens
wide his lips comes to ruin. \bibleverse{4} The soul of the sluggard
desires, and has nothing, but the desire of the diligent shall be fully
satisfied. \bibleverse{5} A righteous man hates lies, but a wicked man
brings shame and disgrace. \bibleverse{6} Righteousness guards the way
of integrity, but wickedness overthrows the sinner. \bibleverse{7} There
are some who pretend to be rich, yet have nothing. There are some who
pretend to be poor, yet have great wealth. \bibleverse{8} The ransom of
a man's life is his riches, but the poor hear no threats. \bibleverse{9}
The light of the righteous shines brightly, but the lamp of the wicked
is snuffed out. \bibleverse{10} Pride only breeds quarrels, but wisdom
is with people who take advice. \bibleverse{11} Wealth gained
dishonestly dwindles away, but he who gathers by hand makes it grow.
\bibleverse{12} Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when longing is
fulfilled, it is a tree of life. \bibleverse{13} Whoever despises
instruction will pay for it, but he who respects a command will be
rewarded. \bibleverse{14} The teaching of the wise is a spring of life,
to turn from the snares of death. \bibleverse{15} Good understanding
wins favor, but the way of the unfaithful is hard. \bibleverse{16} Every
prudent man acts from knowledge, but a fool exposes folly.
\bibleverse{17} A wicked messenger falls into trouble, but a trustworthy
envoy gains healing. \bibleverse{18} Poverty and shame come to him who
refuses discipline, but he who heeds correction shall be honored.
\bibleverse{19} Longing fulfilled is sweet to the soul, but fools detest
turning from evil. \bibleverse{20} One who walks with wise men grows
wise, but a companion of fools suffers harm. \bibleverse{21} Misfortune
pursues sinners, but prosperity rewards the righteous. \bibleverse{22} A
good man leaves an inheritance to his children's children, but the
wealth of the sinner is stored for the righteous. \bibleverse{23} An
abundance of food is in poor people's fields, but injustice sweeps it
away. \bibleverse{24} One who spares the rod hates his son, but one who
loves him is careful to discipline him. \bibleverse{25} The righteous
one eats to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked goes
hungry.

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} Every wise woman builds her house, but the foolish one
tears it down with her own hands. \bibleverse{2} He who walks in his
uprightness fears Yahweh, but he who is perverse in his ways despises
him. \bibleverse{3} The fool's talk brings a rod to his back, but the
lips of the wise protect them. \bibleverse{4} Where no oxen are, the
crib is clean, but much increase is by the strength of the ox.
\bibleverse{5} A truthful witness will not lie, but a false witness
pours out lies. \bibleverse{6} A scoffer seeks wisdom, and doesn't find
it, but knowledge comes easily to a discerning person. \bibleverse{7}
Stay away from a foolish man, for you won't find knowledge on his lips.
\bibleverse{8} The wisdom of the prudent is to think about his way, but
the folly of fools is deceit. \bibleverse{9} Fools mock at making
atonement for sins, but among the upright there is good will.
\bibleverse{10} The heart knows its own bitterness and joy; he will not
share these with a stranger. \bibleverse{11} The house of the wicked
will be overthrown, but the tent of the upright will flourish.
\bibleverse{12} There is a way which seems right to a man, but in the
end it leads to death. \bibleverse{13} Even in laughter the heart may be
sorrowful, and mirth may end in heaviness. \bibleverse{14} The
unfaithful will be repaid for his own ways; likewise a good man will be
rewarded for his ways. \bibleverse{15} A simple man believes everything,
but the prudent man carefully considers his ways. \bibleverse{16} A wise
man fears and shuns evil, but the fool is hot headed and reckless.
\bibleverse{17} He who is quick to become angry will commit folly, and a
crafty man is hated. \bibleverse{18} The simple inherit folly, but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge. \bibleverse{19} The evil bow down
before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
\bibleverse{20} The poor person is shunned even by his own neighbor, but
the rich person has many friends. \bibleverse{21} He who despises his
neighbor sins, but he who has pity on the poor is blessed.
\bibleverse{22} Don't they go astray who plot evil? But love and
faithfulness belong to those who plan good. \bibleverse{23} In all hard
work there is profit, but the talk of the lips leads only to poverty.
\bibleverse{24} The crown of the wise is their riches, but the folly of
fools crowns them with folly. \bibleverse{25} A truthful witness saves
souls, but a false witness is deceitful. \bibleverse{26} In the fear of
Yahweh is a secure fortress, and he will be a refuge for his children.
\bibleverse{27} The fear of Yahweh is a fountain of life, turning people
from the snares of death. \bibleverse{28} In the multitude of people is
the king's glory, but in the lack of people is the destruction of the
prince. \bibleverse{29} He who is slow to anger has great understanding,
but he who has a quick temper displays folly. \bibleverse{30} The life
of the body is a heart at peace, but envy rots the bones.
\bibleverse{31} He who oppresses the poor shows contempt for his Maker,
but he who is kind to the needy honors him. \bibleverse{32} The wicked
is brought down in his calamity, but in death, the righteous has a
refuge. \bibleverse{33} Wisdom rests in the heart of one who has
understanding, and is even made known in the inward part of fools.
\bibleverse{34} Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a disgrace to
any people. \bibleverse{35} The king's favor is toward a servant who
deals wisely, but his wrath is toward one who causes shame.

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs
up anger. \bibleverse{2} The tongue of the wise commends knowledge, but
the mouths of fools gush out folly. \bibleverse{3} Yahweh's eyes are
everywhere, keeping watch on the evil and the good. \bibleverse{4} A
gentle tongue is a tree of life, but deceit in it crushes the spirit.
\bibleverse{5} A fool despises his father's correction, but he who heeds
reproof shows prudence. \bibleverse{6} In the house of the righteous is
much treasure, but the income of the wicked brings trouble.
\bibleverse{7} The lips of the wise spread knowledge; not so with the
heart of fools. \bibleverse{8} The sacrifice made by the wicked is an
abomination to Yahweh, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
\bibleverse{9} The way of the wicked is an abomination to Yahweh, but he
loves him who follows after righteousness. \bibleverse{10} There is
stern discipline for one who forsakes the way. Whoever hates reproof
shall die. \bibleverse{11} Sheol\footnote{\textbf{15:11} Sheol is the
  place of the dead.} and Abaddon are before Yahweh--- how much more
then the hearts of the children of men! \bibleverse{12} A scoffer
doesn't love to be reproved; he will not go to the wise. \bibleverse{13}
A glad heart makes a cheerful face, but an aching heart breaks the
spirit. \bibleverse{14} The heart of one who has understanding seeks
knowledge, but the mouths of fools feed on folly. \bibleverse{15} All
the days of the afflicted are wretched, but one who has a cheerful heart
enjoys a continual feast. \bibleverse{16} Better is little, with the
fear of Yahweh, than great treasure with trouble. \bibleverse{17} Better
is a dinner of herbs, where love is, than a fattened calf with hatred.
\bibleverse{18} A wrathful man stirs up contention, but one who is slow
to anger appeases strife. \bibleverse{19} The way of the sluggard is
like a thorn patch, but the path of the upright is a highway.
\bibleverse{20} A wise son makes a father glad, but a foolish man
despises his mother. \bibleverse{21} Folly is joy to one who is void of
wisdom, but a man of understanding keeps his way straight.
\bibleverse{22} Where there is no counsel, plans fail; but in a
multitude of counselors they are established. \bibleverse{23} Joy comes
to a man with the reply of his mouth. How good is a word at the right
time! \bibleverse{24} The path of life leads upward for the wise, to
keep him from going downward to Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{15:24} Sheol is
  the place of the dead.} \bibleverse{25} Yahweh will uproot the house
of the proud, but he will keep the widow's borders intact.
\bibleverse{26} Yahweh detests the thoughts of the wicked, but the
thoughts of the pure are pleasing. \bibleverse{27} He who is greedy for
gain troubles his own house, but he who hates bribes will live.
\bibleverse{28} The heart of the righteous weighs answers, but the mouth
of the wicked gushes out evil. \bibleverse{29} Yahweh is far from the
wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous. \bibleverse{30} The
light of the eyes rejoices the heart. Good news gives health to the
bones. \bibleverse{31} The ear that listens to reproof lives, and will
be at home among the wise. \bibleverse{32} He who refuses correction
despises his own soul, but he who listens to reproof gets understanding.
\bibleverse{33} The fear of Yahweh teaches wisdom. Before honor is
humility.

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} The plans of the heart belong to man, but the answer of
the tongue is from Yahweh. \bibleverse{2} All the ways of a man are
clean in his own eyes, but Yahweh weighs the motives. \bibleverse{3}
Commit your deeds to Yahweh, and your plans shall succeed.
\bibleverse{4} Yahweh has made everything for its own end--- yes, even
the wicked for the day of evil. \bibleverse{5} Everyone who is proud in
heart is an abomination to Yahweh; they shall certainly not be
unpunished. \bibleverse{6} By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for. By
the fear of Yahweh men depart from evil. \bibleverse{7} When a man's
ways please Yahweh, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
\bibleverse{8} Better is a little with righteousness, than great
revenues with injustice. \bibleverse{9} A man's heart plans his course,
but Yahweh directs his steps. \bibleverse{10} Inspired judgments are on
the lips of the king. He shall not betray his mouth. \bibleverse{11}
Honest balances and scales are Yahweh's; all the weights in the bag are
his work. \bibleverse{12} It is an abomination for kings to do wrong,
for the throne is established by righteousness. \bibleverse{13}
Righteous lips are the delight of kings. They value one who speaks the
truth. \bibleverse{14} The king's wrath is a messenger of death, but a
wise man will pacify it. \bibleverse{15} In the light of the king's face
is life. His favor is like a cloud of the spring rain. \bibleverse{16}
How much better it is to get wisdom than gold! Yes, to get understanding
is to be chosen rather than silver. \bibleverse{17} The highway of the
upright is to depart from evil. He who keeps his way preserves his soul.
\bibleverse{18} Pride goes before destruction, and an arrogant spirit
before a fall. \bibleverse{19} It is better to be of a lowly spirit with
the poor, than to divide the plunder with the proud. \bibleverse{20} He
who heeds the Word finds prosperity. Whoever trusts in Yahweh is
blessed. \bibleverse{21} The wise in heart shall be called prudent.
Pleasantness of the lips promotes instruction. \bibleverse{22}
Understanding is a fountain of life to one who has it, but the
punishment of fools is their folly. \bibleverse{23} The heart of the
wise instructs his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. \bibleverse{24}
Pleasant words are a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the
bones. \bibleverse{25} There is a way which seems right to a man, but in
the end it leads to death. \bibleverse{26} The appetite of the laboring
man labors for him, for his mouth urges him on. \bibleverse{27} A
worthless man devises mischief. His speech is like a scorching fire.
\bibleverse{28} A perverse man stirs up strife. A whisperer separates
close friends. \bibleverse{29} A man of violence entices his neighbor,
and leads him in a way that is not good. \bibleverse{30} One who winks
his eyes to plot perversities, one who compresses his lips, is bent on
evil. \bibleverse{31} Gray hair is a crown of glory. It is attained by a
life of righteousness. \bibleverse{32} One who is slow to anger is
better than the mighty; one who rules his spirit, than he who takes a
city. \bibleverse{33} The lot is cast into the lap, but its every
decision is from Yahweh.

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} Better is a dry morsel with quietness, than a house full
of feasting with strife. \bibleverse{2} A servant who deals wisely will
rule over a son who causes shame, and shall have a part in the
inheritance among the brothers. \bibleverse{3} The refining pot is for
silver, and the furnace for gold, but Yahweh tests the hearts.
\bibleverse{4} An evildoer heeds wicked lips. A liar gives ear to a
mischievous tongue. \bibleverse{5} Whoever mocks the poor reproaches his
Maker. He who is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.
\bibleverse{6} Children's children are the crown of old men; the glory
of children is their parents. \bibleverse{7} Excellent speech isn't
fitting for a fool, much less do lying lips fit a prince. \bibleverse{8}
A bribe is a precious stone in the eyes of him who gives it; wherever he
turns, he prospers. \bibleverse{9} He who covers an offense promotes
love; but he who repeats a matter separates best friends.
\bibleverse{10} A rebuke enters deeper into one who has understanding
than a hundred lashes into a fool. \bibleverse{11} An evil man seeks
only rebellion; therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
\bibleverse{12} Let a bear robbed of her cubs meet a man, rather than a
fool in his folly. \bibleverse{13} Whoever rewards evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house. \bibleverse{14} The beginning of strife
is like breaching a dam, therefore stop contention before quarreling
breaks out. \bibleverse{15} He who justifies the wicked, and he who
condemns the righteous, both of them alike are an abomination to Yahweh.
\bibleverse{16} Why is there money in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom,
since he has no understanding? \bibleverse{17} A friend loves at all
times; and a brother is born for adversity. \bibleverse{18} A man void
of understanding strikes hands, and becomes collateral in the presence
of his neighbor. \bibleverse{19} He who loves disobedience loves strife.
One who builds a high gate seeks destruction. \bibleverse{20} One who
has a perverse heart doesn't find prosperity, and one who has a
deceitful tongue falls into trouble. \bibleverse{21} He who becomes the
father of a fool grieves. The father of a fool has no joy.
\bibleverse{22} A cheerful heart makes good medicine, but a crushed
spirit dries up the bones. \bibleverse{23} A wicked man receives a bribe
in secret, to pervert the ways of justice. \bibleverse{24} Wisdom is
before the face of one who has understanding, but the eyes of a fool
wander to the ends of the earth. \bibleverse{25} A foolish son brings
grief to his father, and bitterness to her who bore him. \bibleverse{26}
Also to punish the righteous is not good, nor to flog officials for
their integrity. \bibleverse{27} He who spares his words has knowledge.
He who is even tempered is a man of understanding. \bibleverse{28} Even
a fool, when he keeps silent, is counted wise. When he shuts his lips,
he is thought to be discerning.

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} A man who isolates himself pursues selfishness, and
defies all sound judgment. \bibleverse{2} A fool has no delight in
understanding, but only in revealing his own opinion. \bibleverse{3}
When wickedness comes, contempt also comes, and with shame comes
disgrace. \bibleverse{4} The words of a man's mouth are like deep
waters. The fountain of wisdom is like a flowing brook. \bibleverse{5}
To be partial to the faces of the wicked is not good, nor to deprive the
innocent of justice. \bibleverse{6} A fool's lips come into strife, and
his mouth invites beatings. \bibleverse{7} A fool's mouth is his
destruction, and his lips are a snare to his soul. \bibleverse{8} The
words of a gossip are like dainty morsels: they go down into a person's
innermost parts. \bibleverse{9} One who is slack in his work is brother
to him who is a master of destruction. \bibleverse{10} Yahweh's name is
a strong tower: the righteous run to him, and are safe. \bibleverse{11}
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, like an unscalable wall in his
own imagination. \bibleverse{12} Before destruction the heart of man is
proud, but before honor is humility. \bibleverse{13} He who answers
before he hears, that is folly and shame to him. \bibleverse{14} A man's
spirit will sustain him in sickness, but a crushed spirit, who can bear?
\bibleverse{15} The heart of the discerning gets knowledge. The ear of
the wise seeks knowledge. \bibleverse{16} A man's gift makes room for
him, and brings him before great men. \bibleverse{17} He who pleads his
cause first seems right--- until another comes and questions him.
\bibleverse{18} The lot settles disputes, and keeps strong ones apart.
\bibleverse{19} A brother offended is more difficult than a fortified
city. Disputes are like the bars of a fortress. \bibleverse{20} A man's
stomach is filled with the fruit of his mouth. With the harvest of his
lips he is satisfied. \bibleverse{21} Death and life are in the power of
the tongue; those who love it will eat its fruit. \bibleverse{22}
Whoever finds a wife finds a good thing, and obtains favor of Yahweh.
\bibleverse{23} The poor plead for mercy, but the rich answer harshly.
\bibleverse{24} A man of many companions may be ruined, but there is a
friend who sticks closer than a brother.

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} Better is the poor who walks in his integrity than he who
is perverse in his lips and is a fool. \bibleverse{2} It isn't good to
have zeal without knowledge, nor being hasty with one's feet and missing
the way. \bibleverse{3} The foolishness of man subverts his way; his
heart rages against Yahweh. \bibleverse{4} Wealth adds many friends, but
the poor is separated from his friend. \bibleverse{5} A false witness
shall not be unpunished. He who pours out lies shall not go free.
\bibleverse{6} Many will entreat the favor of a ruler, and everyone is a
friend to a man who gives gifts. \bibleverse{7} All the relatives of the
poor shun him; how much more do his friends avoid him! He pursues them
with pleas, but they are gone. \bibleverse{8} He who gets wisdom loves
his own soul. He who keeps understanding shall find good. \bibleverse{9}
A false witness shall not be unpunished. He who utters lies shall
perish. \bibleverse{10} Delicate living is not appropriate for a fool,
much less for a servant to have rule over princes. \bibleverse{11} The
discretion of a man makes him slow to anger. It is his glory to overlook
an offense. \bibleverse{12} The king's wrath is like the roaring of a
lion, but his favor is like dew on the grass. \bibleverse{13} A foolish
son is the calamity of his father. A wife's quarrels are a continual
dripping. \bibleverse{14} House and riches are an inheritance from
fathers, but a prudent wife is from Yahweh. \bibleverse{15} Slothfulness
casts into a deep sleep. The idle soul shall suffer hunger.
\bibleverse{16} He who keeps the commandment keeps his soul, but he who
is contemptuous in his ways shall die. \bibleverse{17} He who has pity
on the poor lends to Yahweh; he will reward him. \bibleverse{18}
Discipline your son, for there is hope; don't be a willing party to his
death. \bibleverse{19} A hot-tempered man must pay the penalty, for if
you rescue him, you must do it again. \bibleverse{20} Listen to counsel
and receive instruction, that you may be wise in your latter end.
\bibleverse{21} There are many plans in a man's heart, but Yahweh's
counsel will prevail. \bibleverse{22} That which makes a man to be
desired is his kindness. A poor man is better than a liar.
\bibleverse{23} The fear of Yahweh leads to life, then contentment; he
rests and will not be touched by trouble. \bibleverse{24} The sluggard
buries his hand in the dish; he will not so much as bring it to his
mouth again. \bibleverse{25} Flog a scoffer, and the simple will learn
prudence; rebuke one who has understanding, and he will gain knowledge.
\bibleverse{26} He who robs his father and drives away his mother is a
son who causes shame and brings reproach. \bibleverse{27} If you stop
listening to instruction, my son, you will stray from the words of
knowledge. \bibleverse{28} A corrupt witness mocks justice, and the
mouth of the wicked gulps down iniquity. \bibleverse{29} Penalties are
prepared for scoffers, and beatings for the backs of fools.

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} Wine is a mocker and beer is a brawler. Whoever is led
astray by them is not wise. \bibleverse{2} The terror of a king is like
the roaring of a lion. He who provokes him to anger forfeits his own
life. \bibleverse{3} It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife,
but every fool will be quarreling. \bibleverse{4} The sluggard will not
plow by reason of the winter; therefore he shall beg in harvest, and
have nothing. \bibleverse{5} Counsel in the heart of man is like deep
water, but a man of understanding will draw it out. \bibleverse{6} Many
men claim to be men of unfailing love, but who can find a faithful man?
\bibleverse{7} A righteous man walks in integrity. Blessed are his
children after him. \bibleverse{8} A king who sits on the throne of
judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes. \bibleverse{9} Who can
say, ``I have made my heart pure. I am clean and without sin?''
\bibleverse{10} Differing weights and differing measures, both of them
alike are an abomination to Yahweh. \bibleverse{11} Even a child makes
himself known by his doings, whether his work is pure, and whether it is
right. \bibleverse{12} The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, Yahweh has
made even both of them. \bibleverse{13} Don't love sleep, lest you come
to poverty. Open your eyes, and you shall be satisfied with bread.
\bibleverse{14} ``It's no good, it's no good,'' says the buyer; but when
he is gone his way, then he boasts. \bibleverse{15} There is gold and
abundance of rubies, but the lips of knowledge are a rare jewel.
\bibleverse{16} Take the garment of one who puts up collateral for a
stranger; and hold him in pledge for a wayward woman. \bibleverse{17}
Fraudulent food is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth is filled
with gravel. \bibleverse{18} Plans are established by advice; by wise
guidance you wage war! \bibleverse{19} He who goes about as a
tale-bearer reveals secrets; therefore don't keep company with him who
opens wide his lips. \bibleverse{20} Whoever curses his father or his
mother, his lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness.
\bibleverse{21} An inheritance quickly gained at the beginning won't be
blessed in the end. \bibleverse{22} Don't say, ``I will pay back evil.''
Wait for Yahweh, and he will save you. \bibleverse{23} Yahweh detests
differing weights, and dishonest scales are not pleasing.
\bibleverse{24} A man's steps are from Yahweh; how then can man
understand his way? \bibleverse{25} It is a snare to a man to make a
rash dedication, then later to consider his vows. \bibleverse{26} A wise
king winnows out the wicked, and drives the threshing wheel over them.
\bibleverse{27} The spirit of man is Yahweh's lamp, searching all his
innermost parts. \bibleverse{28} Love and faithfulness keep the king
safe. His throne is sustained by love. \bibleverse{29} The glory of
young men is their strength. The splendor of old men is their gray hair.
\bibleverse{30} Wounding blows cleanse away evil, and beatings purge the
innermost parts.

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} The king's heart is in Yahweh's hand like the
watercourses. He turns it wherever he desires. \bibleverse{2} Every way
of a man is right in his own eyes, but Yahweh weighs the hearts.
\bibleverse{3} To do righteousness and justice is more acceptable to
Yahweh than sacrifice. \bibleverse{4} A high look and a proud heart, the
lamp of the wicked, is sin. \bibleverse{5} The plans of the diligent
surely lead to profit; and everyone who is hasty surely rushes to
poverty. \bibleverse{6} Getting treasures by a lying tongue is a
fleeting vapor for those who seek death. \bibleverse{7} The violence of
the wicked will drive them away, because they refuse to do what is
right. \bibleverse{8} The way of the guilty is devious, but the conduct
of the innocent is upright. \bibleverse{9} It is better to dwell in the
corner of the housetop than to share a house with a contentious woman.
\bibleverse{10} The soul of the wicked desires evil; his neighbor finds
no mercy in his eyes. \bibleverse{11} When the mocker is punished, the
simple gains wisdom. When the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge.
\bibleverse{12} The Righteous One considers the house of the wicked, and
brings the wicked to ruin. \bibleverse{13} Whoever stops his ears at the
cry of the poor, he will also cry out, but shall not be heard.
\bibleverse{14} A gift in secret pacifies anger, and a bribe in the
cloak, strong wrath. \bibleverse{15} It is joy to the righteous to do
justice; but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.
\bibleverse{16} The man who wanders out of the way of understanding
shall rest in the assembly of the departed spirits. \bibleverse{17} He
who loves pleasure will be a poor man. He who loves wine and oil won't
be rich. \bibleverse{18} The wicked is a ransom for the righteous, the
treacherous for the upright. \bibleverse{19} It is better to dwell in a
desert land, than with a contentious and fretful woman. \bibleverse{20}
There is precious treasure and oil in the dwelling of the wise, but a
foolish man swallows it up. \bibleverse{21} He who follows after
righteousness and kindness finds life, righteousness, and honor.
\bibleverse{22} A wise man scales the city of the mighty, and brings
down the strength of its confidence. \bibleverse{23} Whoever guards his
mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from troubles. \bibleverse{24} The
proud and arrogant man---``Scoffer'' is his name--- he works in the
arrogance of pride. \bibleverse{25} The desire of the sluggard kills
him, for his hands refuse to labor. \bibleverse{26} There are those who
covet greedily all day long; but the righteous give and don't withhold.
\bibleverse{27} The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination--- how
much more, when he brings it with a wicked mind! \bibleverse{28} A false
witness will perish. A man who listens speaks to eternity.
\bibleverse{29} A wicked man hardens his face; but as for the upright,
he establishes his ways. \bibleverse{30} There is no wisdom nor
understanding nor counsel against Yahweh. \bibleverse{31} The horse is
prepared for the day of battle; but victory is with Yahweh.

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} A good name is more desirable than great riches, and
loving favor is better than silver and gold. \bibleverse{2} The rich and
the poor have this in common: Yahweh is the maker of them all.
\bibleverse{3} A prudent man sees danger and hides himself; but the
simple pass on, and suffer for it. \bibleverse{4} The result of humility
and the fear of Yahweh is wealth, honor, and life. \bibleverse{5} Thorns
and snares are in the path of the wicked; whoever guards his soul stays
from them. \bibleverse{6} Train up a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not depart from it. \bibleverse{7} The rich rule
over the poor. The borrower is servant to the lender. \bibleverse{8} He
who sows wickedness reaps trouble, and the rod of his fury will be
destroyed. \bibleverse{9} He who has a generous eye will be blessed, for
he shares his food with the poor. \bibleverse{10} Drive out the mocker,
and strife will go out; yes, quarrels and insults will stop.
\bibleverse{11} He who loves purity of heart and speaks gracefully is
the king's friend. \bibleverse{12} Yahweh's eyes watch over knowledge,
but he frustrates the words of the unfaithful. \bibleverse{13} The
sluggard says, ``There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the
streets!'' \bibleverse{14} The mouth of an adulteress is a deep pit. He
who is under Yahweh's wrath will fall into it. \bibleverse{15} Folly is
bound up in the heart of a child; the rod of discipline drives it far
from him. \bibleverse{16} Whoever oppresses the poor for his own
increase and whoever gives to the rich, both come to poverty.

\hypertarget{first-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise-men-introduction}{%
\subsection{First collection of sayings of the wise men;
Introduction}\label{first-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise-men-introduction}}

\bibleverse{17} Turn your ear, and listen to the words of the wise.
Apply your heart to my teaching. \bibleverse{18} For it is a pleasant
thing if you keep them within you, if all of them are ready on your
lips. \bibleverse{19} I teach you today, even you, so that your trust
may be in Yahweh. \bibleverse{20} Haven't I written to you thirty
excellent things of counsel and knowledge, \bibleverse{21} To teach you
truth, reliable words, to give sound answers to the ones who sent you?

\hypertarget{individual-reminders}{%
\subsection{Individual Reminders}\label{individual-reminders}}

\bibleverse{22} Don't exploit the poor because he is poor; and don't
crush the needy in court; \bibleverse{23} for Yahweh will plead their
case, and plunder the life of those who plunder them. \bibleverse{24}
Don't befriend a hot-tempered man. Don't associate with one who harbors
anger, \bibleverse{25} lest you learn his ways and ensnare your soul.
\bibleverse{26} Don't you be one of those who strike hands, of those who
are collateral for debts. \bibleverse{27} If you don't have means to
pay, why should he take away your bed from under you? \bibleverse{28}
Don't move the ancient boundary stone which your fathers have set up.
\bibleverse{29} Do you see a man skilled in his work? He will serve
kings. He won't serve obscure men.

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} When you sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently
what is before you; \bibleverse{2} put a knife to your throat if you are
a man given to appetite. \bibleverse{3} Don't be desirous of his
dainties, since they are deceitful food. \bibleverse{4} Don't weary
yourself to be rich. In your wisdom, show restraint. \bibleverse{5} Why
do you set your eyes on that which is not? For it certainly sprouts
wings like an eagle and flies in the sky. \bibleverse{6} Don't eat the
food of him who has a stingy eye, and don't crave his delicacies,
\bibleverse{7} for as he thinks about the cost, so he is. ``Eat and
drink!'' he says to you, but his heart is not with you. \bibleverse{8}
You will vomit up the morsel which you have eaten and waste your
pleasant words. \bibleverse{9} Don't speak in the ears of a fool, for he
will despise the wisdom of your words. \bibleverse{10} Don't move the
ancient boundary stone. Don't encroach on the fields of the fatherless,
\bibleverse{11} for their Defender is strong. He will plead their case
against you. \bibleverse{12} Apply your heart to instruction, and your
ears to the words of knowledge. \bibleverse{13} Don't withhold
correction from a child. If you punish him with the rod, he will not
die. \bibleverse{14} Punish him with the rod, and save his soul from
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{23:14} Sheol is the place of the dead.}
\bibleverse{15} My son, if your heart is wise, then my heart will be
glad, even mine. \bibleverse{16} Yes, my heart will rejoice when your
lips speak what is right. \bibleverse{17} Don't let your heart envy
sinners, but rather fear Yahweh all day long. \bibleverse{18} Indeed
surely there is a future hope, and your hope will not be cut off.
\bibleverse{19} Listen, my son, and be wise, and keep your heart on the
right path! \bibleverse{20} Don't be among ones drinking too much wine,
or those who gorge themselves on meat; \bibleverse{21} for the drunkard
and the glutton shall become poor; and drowsiness clothes them in rags.
\bibleverse{22} Listen to your father who gave you life, and don't
despise your mother when she is old. \bibleverse{23} Buy the truth, and
don't sell it. Get wisdom, discipline, and understanding.
\bibleverse{24} The father of the righteous has great joy. Whoever
fathers a wise child delights in him. \bibleverse{25} Let your father
and your mother be glad! Let her who bore you rejoice! \bibleverse{26}
My son, give me your heart; and let your eyes keep in my ways.
\bibleverse{27} For a prostitute is a deep pit; and a wayward wife is a
narrow well. \bibleverse{28} Yes, she lies in wait like a robber, and
increases the unfaithful among men. \bibleverse{29} Who has woe? Who has
sorrow? Who has strife? Who has complaints? Who has needless bruises?
Who has bloodshot eyes? \bibleverse{30} Those who stay long at the wine;
those who go to seek out mixed wine. \bibleverse{31} Don't look at the
wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down
smoothly. \bibleverse{32} In the end, it bites like a snake, and poisons
like a viper. \bibleverse{33} Your eyes will see strange things, and
your mind will imagine confusing things. \bibleverse{34} Yes, you will
be as he who lies down in the middle of the sea, or as he who lies on
top of the rigging: \bibleverse{35} ``They hit me, and I was not hurt!
They beat me, and I don't feel it! When will I wake up? I can do it
again. I will look for more.''

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Don't be envious of evil men, neither desire to be with
them; \bibleverse{2} for their hearts plot violence and their lips talk
about mischief. \bibleverse{3} Through wisdom a house is built; by
understanding it is established; \bibleverse{4} by knowledge the rooms
are filled with all rare and beautiful treasure. \bibleverse{5} A wise
man has great power. A knowledgeable man increases strength,
\bibleverse{6} for by wise guidance you wage your war, and victory is in
many advisors. \bibleverse{7} Wisdom is too high for a fool. He doesn't
open his mouth in the gate. \bibleverse{8} One who plots to do evil will
be called a schemer. \bibleverse{9} The schemes of folly are sin. The
mocker is detested by men. \bibleverse{10} If you falter in the time of
trouble, your strength is small. \bibleverse{11} Rescue those who are
being led away to death! Indeed, hold back those who are staggering to
the slaughter! \bibleverse{12} If you say, ``Behold, we didn't know
this,'' doesn't he who weighs the hearts consider it? He who keeps your
soul, doesn't he know it? Shall he not render to every man according to
his work? \bibleverse{13} My son, eat honey, for it is good, the
droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to your taste;
\bibleverse{14} so you shall know wisdom to be to your soul. If you have
found it, then there will be a reward: Your hope will not be cut off.
\bibleverse{15} Don't lay in wait, wicked man, against the habitation of
the righteous. Don't destroy his resting place; \bibleverse{16} for a
righteous man falls seven times and rises up again, but the wicked are
overthrown by calamity. \bibleverse{17} Don't rejoice when your enemy
falls. Don't let your heart be glad when he is overthrown,
\bibleverse{18} lest Yahweh see it, and it displease him, and he turn
away his wrath from him. \bibleverse{19} Don't fret yourself because of
evildoers, neither be envious of the wicked; \bibleverse{20} for there
will be no reward to the evil man. The lamp of the wicked will be
snuffed out. \bibleverse{21} My son, fear Yahweh and the king. Don't
join those who are rebellious, \bibleverse{22} for their calamity will
rise suddenly. Who knows what destruction may come from them both?

\hypertarget{second-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise}{%
\subsection{Second collection of sayings of the
wise}\label{second-collection-of-sayings-of-the-wise}}

\bibleverse{23} These also are sayings of the wise: To show partiality
in judgment is not good. \bibleverse{24} He who says to the wicked,
``You are righteous,'' peoples will curse him, and nations will abhor
him--- \bibleverse{25} but it will go well with those who convict the
guilty, and a rich blessing will come on them. \bibleverse{26} An honest
answer is like a kiss on the lips. \bibleverse{27} Prepare your work
outside, and get your fields ready. Afterwards, build your house.
\bibleverse{28} Don't be a witness against your neighbor without cause.
Don't deceive with your lips. \bibleverse{29} Don't say, ``I will do to
him as he has done to me; I will repay the man according to his work.''
\bibleverse{30} I went by the field of the sluggard, by the vineyard of
the man void of understanding. \bibleverse{31} Behold, it was all grown
over with thorns. Its surface was covered with nettles, and its stone
wall was broken down. \bibleverse{32} Then I saw, and considered well. I
saw, and received instruction: \bibleverse{33} a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, \bibleverse{34} so your
poverty will come as a robber and your want as an armed man.

\hypertarget{third-collection-of-proverbs-of-solomon}{%
\subsection{Third collection of Proverbs of
Solomon}\label{third-collection-of-proverbs-of-solomon}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of
Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. \bibleverse{2} It is the glory of God
to conceal a thing, but the glory of kings is to search out a matter.
\bibleverse{3} As the heavens for height, and the earth for depth, so
the hearts of kings are unsearchable. \bibleverse{4} Take away the dross
from the silver, and material comes out for the refiner. \bibleverse{5}
Take away the wicked from the king's presence, and his throne will be
established in righteousness. \bibleverse{6} Don't exalt yourself in the
presence of the king, or claim a place among great men; \bibleverse{7}
for it is better that it be said to you, ``Come up here,'' than that you
should be put lower in the presence of the prince, whom your eyes have
seen. \bibleverse{8} Don't be hasty in bringing charges to court. What
will you do in the end when your neighbor shames you? \bibleverse{9}
Debate your case with your neighbor, and don't betray the confidence of
another, \bibleverse{10} lest one who hears it put you to shame, and
your bad reputation never depart. \bibleverse{11} A word fitly spoken is
like apples of gold in settings of silver. \bibleverse{12} As an earring
of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover to an
obedient ear. \bibleverse{13} As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, so is a faithful messenger to those who send him; for he
refreshes the soul of his masters. \bibleverse{14} As clouds and wind
without rain, so is he who boasts of gifts deceptively. \bibleverse{15}
By patience a ruler is persuaded. A soft tongue breaks the bone.
\bibleverse{16} Have you found honey? Eat as much as is sufficient for
you, lest you eat too much, and vomit it. \bibleverse{17} Let your foot
be seldom in your neighbor's house, lest he be weary of you, and hate
you. \bibleverse{18} A man who gives false testimony against his
neighbor is like a club, a sword, or a sharp arrow. \bibleverse{19}
Confidence in someone unfaithful in time of trouble is like a bad tooth
or a lame foot. \bibleverse{20} As one who takes away a garment in cold
weather, or vinegar on soda, so is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.
\bibleverse{21} If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat. If he is
thirsty, give him water to drink; \bibleverse{22} for you will heap
coals of fire on his head, and Yahweh will reward you. \bibleverse{23}
The north wind produces rain; so a backbiting tongue brings an angry
face. \bibleverse{24} It is better to dwell in the corner of the
housetop than to share a house with a contentious woman. \bibleverse{25}
Like cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
\bibleverse{26} Like a muddied spring and a polluted well, so is a
righteous man who gives way before the wicked. \bibleverse{27} It is not
good to eat much honey, nor is it honorable to seek one's own honor.
\bibleverse{28} Like a city that is broken down and without walls is a
man whose spirit is without restraint.

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} Like snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honor is
not fitting for a fool. \bibleverse{2} Like a fluttering sparrow, like a
darting swallow, so the undeserved curse doesn't come to rest.
\bibleverse{3} A whip is for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and a
rod for the back of fools! \bibleverse{4} Don't answer a fool according
to his folly, lest you also be like him. \bibleverse{5} Answer a fool
according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes. \bibleverse{6}
One who sends a message by the hand of a fool is cutting off feet and
drinking violence. \bibleverse{7} Like the legs of the lame that hang
loose, so is a parable in the mouth of fools. \bibleverse{8} As one who
binds a stone in a sling, so is he who gives honor to a fool.
\bibleverse{9} Like a thorn bush that goes into the hand of a drunkard,
so is a parable in the mouth of fools. \bibleverse{10} As an archer who
wounds all, so is he who hires a fool or he who hires those who pass by.
\bibleverse{11} As a dog that returns to his vomit, so is a fool who
repeats his folly. \bibleverse{12} Do you see a man wise in his own
eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him. \bibleverse{13} The
sluggard says, ``There is a lion in the road! A fierce lion roams the
streets!'' \bibleverse{14} As the door turns on its hinges, so does the
sluggard on his bed. \bibleverse{15} The sluggard buries his hand in the
dish. He is too lazy to bring it back to his mouth. \bibleverse{16} The
sluggard is wiser in his own eyes than seven men who answer with
discretion. \bibleverse{17} Like one who grabs a dog's ears is one who
passes by and meddles in a quarrel not his own. \bibleverse{18} Like a
madman who shoots torches, arrows, and death, \bibleverse{19} is the man
who deceives his neighbor and says, ``Am I not joking?'' \bibleverse{20}
For lack of wood a fire goes out. Without gossip, a quarrel dies down.
\bibleverse{21} As coals are to hot embers, and wood to fire, so is a
contentious man to kindling strife. \bibleverse{22} The words of a
whisperer are as dainty morsels, they go down into the innermost parts.
\bibleverse{23} Like silver dross on an earthen vessel are the lips of a
fervent one with an evil heart. \bibleverse{24} A malicious man
disguises himself with his lips, but he harbors evil in his heart.
\bibleverse{25} When his speech is charming, don't believe him, for
there are seven abominations in his heart. \bibleverse{26} His malice
may be concealed by deception, but his wickedness will be exposed in the
assembly. \bibleverse{27} Whoever digs a pit shall fall into it. Whoever
rolls a stone, it will come back on him. \bibleverse{28} A lying tongue
hates those it hurts; and a flattering mouth works ruin.

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} Don't boast about tomorrow; for you don't know what a day
may bring. \bibleverse{2} Let another man praise you, and not your own
mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips. \bibleverse{3} A stone is
heavy, and sand is a burden; but a fool's provocation is heavier than
both. \bibleverse{4} Wrath is cruel, and anger is overwhelming; but who
is able to stand before jealousy? \bibleverse{5} Better is open rebuke
than hidden love. \bibleverse{6} The wounds of a friend are faithful,
although the kisses of an enemy are profuse. \bibleverse{7} A full soul
loathes a honeycomb; but to a hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet.
\bibleverse{8} As a bird that wanders from her nest, so is a man who
wanders from his home. \bibleverse{9} Perfume and incense bring joy to
the heart; so does earnest counsel from a man's friend. \bibleverse{10}
Don't forsake your friend and your father's friend. Don't go to your
brother's house in the day of your disaster. A neighbor who is near is
better than a distant brother. \bibleverse{11} Be wise, my son, and
bring joy to my heart, then I can answer my tormentor. \bibleverse{12} A
prudent man sees danger and takes refuge; but the simple pass on, and
suffer for it. \bibleverse{13} Take his garment when he puts up
collateral for a stranger. Hold it for a wayward woman! \bibleverse{14}
He who blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning, it
will be taken as a curse by him. \bibleverse{15} A continual dropping on
a rainy day and a contentious wife are alike: \bibleverse{16}
restraining her is like restraining the wind, or like grasping oil in
his right hand. \bibleverse{17} Iron sharpens iron; so a man sharpens
his friend's countenance. \bibleverse{18} Whoever tends the fig tree
shall eat its fruit. He who looks after his master shall be honored.
\bibleverse{19} Like water reflects a face, so a man's heart reflects
the man. \bibleverse{20} Sheol\footnote{\textbf{27:20} Sheol is the
  place of the dead.} and Abaddon are never satisfied; and a man's eyes
are never satisfied. \bibleverse{21} The crucible is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; but man is refined by his praise. \bibleverse{22}
Though you grind a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with grain, yet
his foolishness will not be removed from him. \bibleverse{23} Know well
the state of your flocks, and pay attention to your herds,
\bibleverse{24} for riches are not forever, nor does the crown endure to
all generations. \bibleverse{25} The hay is removed, and the new growth
appears, the grasses of the hills are gathered in. \bibleverse{26} The
lambs are for your clothing, and the goats are the price of a field.
\bibleverse{27} There will be plenty of goats' milk for your food, for
your family's food, and for the nourishment of your servant girls.

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} The wicked flee when no one pursues; but the righteous
are as bold as a lion. \bibleverse{2} In rebellion, a land has many
rulers, but order is maintained by a man of understanding and knowledge.
\bibleverse{3} A needy man who oppresses the poor is like a driving rain
which leaves no crops. \bibleverse{4} Those who forsake the law praise
the wicked; but those who keep the law contend with them. \bibleverse{5}
Evil men don't understand justice; but those who seek Yahweh understand
it fully. \bibleverse{6} Better is the poor who walks in his integrity
than he who is perverse in his ways, and he is rich. \bibleverse{7}
Whoever keeps the law is a wise son; but he who is a companion of
gluttons shames his father. \bibleverse{8} He who increases his wealth
by excessive interest gathers it for one who has pity on the poor.
\bibleverse{9} He who turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayer is an abomination. \bibleverse{10} Whoever causes the upright to
go astray in an evil way, he will fall into his own trap; but the
blameless will inherit good. \bibleverse{11} The rich man is wise in his
own eyes; but the poor who has understanding sees through him.
\bibleverse{12} When the righteous triumph, there is great glory; but
when the wicked rise, men hide themselves. \bibleverse{13} He who
conceals his sins doesn't prosper, but whoever confesses and renounces
them finds mercy. \bibleverse{14} Blessed is the man who always fears;
but one who hardens his heart falls into trouble. \bibleverse{15} As a
roaring lion or a charging bear, so is a wicked ruler over helpless
people. \bibleverse{16} A tyrannical ruler lacks judgment. One who hates
ill-gotten gain will have long days. \bibleverse{17} A man who is
tormented by blood guilt will be a fugitive until death. No one will
support him. \bibleverse{18} Whoever walks blamelessly is kept safe; but
one with perverse ways will fall suddenly. \bibleverse{19} One who works
his land will have an abundance of food; but one who chases fantasies
will have his fill of poverty. \bibleverse{20} A faithful man is rich
with blessings; but one who is eager to be rich will not go unpunished.
\bibleverse{21} To show partiality is not good, yet a man will do wrong
for a piece of bread. \bibleverse{22} A stingy man hurries after riches,
and doesn't know that poverty waits for him. \bibleverse{23} One who
rebukes a man will afterward find more favor than one who flatters with
the tongue. \bibleverse{24} Whoever robs his father or his mother and
says, ``It's not wrong,'' is a partner with a destroyer. \bibleverse{25}
One who is greedy stirs up strife; but one who trusts in Yahweh will
prosper. \bibleverse{26} One who trusts in himself is a fool; but one
who walks in wisdom is kept safe. \bibleverse{27} One who gives to the
poor has no lack; but one who closes his eyes will have many curses.
\bibleverse{28} When the wicked rise, men hide themselves; but when they
perish, the righteous thrive.

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{29}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} He who is often rebuked and stiffens his neck will be
destroyed suddenly, with no remedy. \bibleverse{2} When the righteous
thrive, the people rejoice; but when the wicked rule, the people groan.
\bibleverse{3} Whoever loves wisdom brings joy to his father; but a
companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth. \bibleverse{4} The king
by justice makes the land stable, but he who takes bribes tears it down.
\bibleverse{5} A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his
feet. \bibleverse{6} An evil man is snared by his sin, but the righteous
can sing and be glad. \bibleverse{7} The righteous care about justice
for the poor. The wicked aren't concerned about knowledge.
\bibleverse{8} Mockers stir up a city, but wise men turn away anger.
\bibleverse{9} If a wise man goes to court with a foolish man, the fool
rages or scoffs, and there is no peace. \bibleverse{10} The bloodthirsty
hate a man of integrity; and they seek the life of the upright.
\bibleverse{11} A fool vents all of his anger, but a wise man brings
himself under control. \bibleverse{12} If a ruler listens to lies, all
of his officials are wicked. \bibleverse{13} The poor man and the
oppressor have this in common: Yahweh gives sight to the eyes of both.
\bibleverse{14} The king who fairly judges the poor, his throne shall be
established forever. \bibleverse{15} The rod of correction gives wisdom,
but a child left to himself causes shame to his mother. \bibleverse{16}
When the wicked increase, sin increases; but the righteous will see
their downfall. \bibleverse{17} Correct your son, and he will give you
peace; yes, he will bring delight to your soul. \bibleverse{18} Where
there is no revelation, the people cast off restraint; but one who keeps
the law is blessed. \bibleverse{19} A servant can't be corrected by
words. Though he understands, yet he will not respond. \bibleverse{20}
Do you see a man who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a
fool than for him. \bibleverse{21} He who pampers his servant from youth
will have him become a son in the end. \bibleverse{22} An angry man
stirs up strife, and a wrathful man abounds in sin. \bibleverse{23} A
man's pride brings him low, but one of lowly spirit gains honor.
\bibleverse{24} Whoever is an accomplice of a thief is an enemy of his
own soul. He takes an oath, but dares not testify. \bibleverse{25} The
fear of man proves to be a snare, but whoever puts his trust in Yahweh
is kept safe. \bibleverse{26} Many seek the ruler's favor, but a man's
justice comes from Yahweh. \bibleverse{27} A dishonest man detests the
righteous, and the upright in their ways detest the wicked.

\hypertarget{sayings-of-agur}{%
\subsection{Sayings of Agur}\label{sayings-of-agur}}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{30}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the revelation: the
man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and Ucal: \bibleverse{2} ``Surely I am the
most ignorant man, and don't have a man's understanding. \bibleverse{3}
I have not learned wisdom, neither do I have the knowledge of the Holy
One. \bibleverse{4} Who has ascended up into heaven, and descended? Who
has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has bound the waters in his
garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his
name, and what is his son's name, if you know? \bibleverse{5} ``Every
word of God is flawless. He is a shield to those who take refuge in him.
\bibleverse{6} Don't you add to his words, lest he reprove you, and you
be found a liar. \bibleverse{7} ``Two things I have asked of you. Don't
deny me before I die. \bibleverse{8} Remove far from me falsehood and
lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with the food that is
needful for me, \bibleverse{9} lest I be full, deny you, and say, `Who
is Yahweh?' or lest I be poor, and steal, and so dishonor the name of my
God. \bibleverse{10} ``Don't slander a servant to his master, lest he
curse you, and you be held guilty. \bibleverse{11} There is a generation
that curses their father, and doesn't bless their mother.
\bibleverse{12} There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes,
yet are not washed from their filthiness. \bibleverse{13} There is a
generation, oh how lofty are their eyes! Their eyelids are lifted up.
\bibleverse{14} There is a generation whose teeth are like swords, and
their jaws like knives, to devour the poor from the earth, and the needy
from among men. \bibleverse{15} ``The leech has two daughters: `Give,
give.' ``There are three things that are never satisfied; four that
don't say, `Enough!': \bibleverse{16} Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{30:16}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} the barren womb, the earth that is
not satisfied with water, and the fire that doesn't say, `Enough!'
\bibleverse{17} ``The eye that mocks at his father, and scorns obedience
to his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, the young
eagles shall eat it. \bibleverse{18} ``There are three things which are
too amazing for me, four which I don't understand: \bibleverse{19} The
way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent on a rock, the way of a
ship in the middle of the sea, and the way of a man with a maiden.
\bibleverse{20} ``So is the way of an adulterous woman: She eats and
wipes her mouth, and says, `I have done nothing wrong.' \bibleverse{21}
``For three things the earth trembles, and under four, it can't bear up:
\bibleverse{22} For a servant when he is king, a fool when he is filled
with food, \bibleverse{23} for an unloved woman when she is married, and
a servant who is heir to her mistress. \bibleverse{24} ``There are four
things which are little on the earth, but they are exceedingly wise:
\bibleverse{25} The ants are not a strong people, yet they provide their
food in the summer. \bibleverse{26} The hyraxes are but a feeble folk,
yet make they their houses in the rocks. \bibleverse{27} The locusts
have no king, yet they advance in ranks. \bibleverse{28} You can catch a
lizard with your hands, yet it is in kings' palaces. \bibleverse{29}
``There are three things which are stately in their march, four which
are stately in going: \bibleverse{30} The lion, which is mightiest among
animals, and doesn't turn away for any; \bibleverse{31} the greyhound;
the male goat; and the king against whom there is no rising up.
\bibleverse{32} ``If you have done foolishly in lifting up yourself, or
if you have thought evil, put your hand over your mouth. \bibleverse{33}
For as the churning of milk produces butter, and the wringing of the
nose produces blood, so the forcing of wrath produces strife.''

\hypertarget{sayings-for-lemuel}{%
\subsection{Sayings for Lemuel}\label{sayings-for-lemuel}}

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{31}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of King Lemuel---the revelation which his
mother taught him: \bibleverse{2} ``Oh, my son! Oh, son of my womb! Oh,
son of my vows! \bibleverse{3} Don't give your strength to women, nor
your ways to that which destroys kings. \bibleverse{4} It is not for
kings, Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes to
say, `Where is strong drink?' \bibleverse{5} lest they drink, and forget
the law, and pervert the justice due to anyone who is afflicted.
\bibleverse{6} Give strong drink to him who is ready to perish, and wine
to the bitter in soul. \bibleverse{7} Let him drink, and forget his
poverty, and remember his misery no more. \bibleverse{8} Open your mouth
for the mute, in the cause of all who are left desolate. \bibleverse{9}
Open your mouth, judge righteously, and serve justice to the poor and
needy.''

\hypertarget{praise-the-able-housewife}{%
\subsection{Praise the able housewife}\label{praise-the-able-housewife}}

\bibleverse{10} \footnote{\textbf{31:10} Proverbs 31:10-31 form an
  acrostic, with each verse starting with each letter of the Hebrew
  alphabet, in order.} Who can find a worthy woman? For her value is far
above rubies. \bibleverse{11} The heart of her husband trusts in her. He
shall have no lack of gain. \bibleverse{12} She does him good, and not
harm, all the days of her life. \bibleverse{13} She seeks wool and flax,
and works eagerly with her hands. \bibleverse{14} She is like the
merchant ships. She brings her bread from afar. \bibleverse{15} She
rises also while it is yet night, gives food to her household, and
portions for her servant girls. \bibleverse{16} She considers a field,
and buys it. With the fruit of her hands, she plants a vineyard.
\bibleverse{17} She arms her waist with strength, and makes her arms
strong. \bibleverse{18} She perceives that her merchandise is
profitable. Her lamp doesn't go out by night. \bibleverse{19} She lays
her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle.
\bibleverse{20} She opens her arms to the poor; yes, she extends her
hands to the needy. \bibleverse{21} She is not afraid of the snow for
her household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
\bibleverse{22} She makes for herself carpets of tapestry. Her clothing
is fine linen and purple. \bibleverse{23} Her husband is respected in
the gates, when he sits among the elders of the land. \bibleverse{24}
She makes linen garments and sells them, and delivers sashes to the
merchant. \bibleverse{25} Strength and dignity are her clothing. She
laughs at the time to come. \bibleverse{26} She opens her mouth with
wisdom. Kind instruction is on her tongue. \bibleverse{27} She looks
well to the ways of her household, and doesn't eat the bread of
idleness. \bibleverse{28} Her children rise up and call her blessed. Her
husband also praises her: \bibleverse{29} ``Many women do noble things,
but you excel them all.'' \bibleverse{30} Charm is deceitful, and beauty
is vain; but a woman who fears Yahweh, she shall be praised.
\bibleverse{31} Give her of the fruit of her hands! Let her works praise
her in the gates!
