\hypertarget{complaint-and-accusation-penance-sermon-and-threat-of-punishment}{%
\subsection{Complaint and accusation, penance sermon and threat of
punishment}\label{complaint-and-accusation-penance-sermon-and-threat-of-punishment}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

\hypertarget{gods-accusation-against-unfaithful-people}{%
\subsection{God's accusation against unfaithful
people}\label{gods-accusation-against-unfaithful-people}}

\bibleverse{2} Hear, heavens, and listen, earth; for Yahweh\footnote{\textbf{1:2}
  ``Yahweh'' is God's proper Name, sometimes rendered ``\textsc{Lord}''
  (all caps) in other translations.} has spoken: ``I have nourished and
brought up children and they have rebelled against me. \bibleverse{3}
The ox knows his owner, and the donkey his master's crib; but Israel
doesn't know. My people don't consider.''

\hypertarget{the-complaint-of-the-prophet-against-the-sinful-people}{%
\subsection{The complaint of the prophet against the sinful
people}\label{the-complaint-of-the-prophet-against-the-sinful-people}}

\bibleverse{4} Ah sinful nation, a people loaded with iniquity,
offspring\footnote{\textbf{1:4} or, seed} of evildoers, children who
deal corruptly! They have forsaken Yahweh. They have despised the Holy
One of Israel. They are estranged and backward. \bibleverse{5} Why
should you be beaten more, that you revolt more and more? The whole head
is sick, and the whole heart faint. \bibleverse{6} From the sole of the
foot even to the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds, welts,
and open sores. They haven't been closed, bandaged, or soothed with oil.
\bibleverse{7} Your country is desolate. Your cities are burned with
fire. Strangers devour your land in your presence and it is desolate, as
overthrown by strangers. \bibleverse{8} The daughter of Zion is left
like a shelter in a vineyard, like a hut in a field of melons, like a
besieged city. \bibleverse{9} Unless Yahweh of Armies had left to us a
very small remnant, we would have been as Sodom. We would have been like
Gomorrah.

\hypertarget{teach-god-about-right-and-wrong-worship}{%
\subsection{Teach God about right and wrong
worship}\label{teach-god-about-right-and-wrong-worship}}

\bibleverse{10} Hear Yahweh's word, you rulers of Sodom! Listen to the
law of our God,\footnote{\textbf{1:10} The Hebrew word rendered ``God''
  is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} you people of Gomorrah!
\bibleverse{11} ``What are the multitude of your sacrifices to me?'',
says Yahweh. ``I have had enough of the burnt offerings of rams and the
fat of fed animals. I don't delight in the blood of bulls, or of lambs,
or of male goats. \bibleverse{12} When you come to appear before me, who
has required this at your hand, to trample my courts? \bibleverse{13}
Bring no more vain offerings. Incense is an abomination to me. New
moons, Sabbaths, and convocations--- I can't stand evil assemblies.
\bibleverse{14} My soul hates your New Moons and your appointed feasts.
They are a burden to me. I am weary of bearing them. \bibleverse{15}
When you spread out your hands, I will hide my eyes from you. Yes, when
you make many prayers, I will not hear. Your hands are full of blood.
\bibleverse{16} Wash yourselves. Make yourself clean. Put away the evil
of your doings from before my eyes. Cease to do evil. \bibleverse{17}
Learn to do well. Seek justice. Relieve the oppressed. Defend the
fatherless. Plead for the widow.''

\hypertarget{gods-dealings-with-judah-the-condition-for-reconciliation-and-salvation-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{God's dealings with Judah; the condition for reconciliation
and salvation of the
people}\label{gods-dealings-with-judah-the-condition-for-reconciliation-and-salvation-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{18} ``Come now, and let's reason together,'' says Yahweh:
``Though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.
Though they are red like crimson, they shall be as wool. \bibleverse{19}
If you are willing and obedient, you will eat the good of the land;
\bibleverse{20} but if you refuse and rebel, you will be devoured with
the sword; for Yahweh's mouth has spoken it.''

\hypertarget{lamentation-for-the-deep-corruption-of-zion-the-future-purification-of-the-city-and-the-annihilation-of-sinners}{%
\subsection{Lamentation for the deep corruption of Zion; the future
purification of the city and the annihilation of
sinners}\label{lamentation-for-the-deep-corruption-of-zion-the-future-purification-of-the-city-and-the-annihilation-of-sinners}}

\bibleverse{21} How the faithful city has become a prostitute! She was
full of justice. Righteousness lodged in her, but now there are
murderers. \bibleverse{22} Your silver has become dross, your wine mixed
with water. \bibleverse{23} Your princes are rebellious and companions
of thieves. Everyone loves bribes and follows after rewards. They don't
defend the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come to them.
\bibleverse{24} Therefore the Lord,\footnote{\textbf{1:24} The word
  translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} Yahweh of Armies, the Mighty One
of Israel, says: ``Ah, I will get relief from my adversaries, and avenge
myself on my enemies. \bibleverse{25} I will turn my hand on you,
thoroughly purge away your dross, and will take away all your
tin.\footnote{\textbf{1:25} tin is a metal that is separated from silver
  during the refining and purification process.} \bibleverse{26} I will
restore your judges as at the first, and your counselors as at the
beginning. Afterward you shall be called `The city of righteousness, a
faithful town.' \bibleverse{27} Zion shall be redeemed with justice, and
her converts with righteousness. \bibleverse{28} But the destruction of
transgressors and sinners shall be together, and those who forsake
Yahweh shall be consumed. \bibleverse{29} For they shall be ashamed of
the oaks which you have desired, and you shall be confounded for the
gardens that you have chosen. \bibleverse{30} For you shall be as an oak
whose leaf fades, and as a garden that has no water. \bibleverse{31} The
strong will be like tinder, and his work like a spark. They will both
burn together, and no one will quench them.''

\hypertarget{new-title-the-world-to-come-as-gods-kingdom-of-peace-around-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{New title; the world to come as God's kingdom of peace
around
Jerusalem}\label{new-title-the-world-to-come-as-gods-kingdom-of-peace-around-jerusalem}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} This is what Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah
and Jerusalem. \bibleverse{2} It shall happen in the latter days, that
the mountain of Yahweh's house shall be established on the top of the
mountains, and shall be raised above the hills; and all nations shall
flow to it. \bibleverse{3} Many peoples shall go and say, ``Come, let's
go up to the mountain of Yahweh, to the house of the God of Jacob; and
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.'' For the
law shall go out of Zion, and Yahweh's word from Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{4} He will judge between the nations, and will decide
concerning many peoples. They shall beat their swords into plowshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. \bibleverse{5}
House of Jacob, come, and let's walk in the light of Yahweh.

\hypertarget{idolatry-and-dependence-on-wealth-and-external-power-defy-the-wrath-and-punishment-of-god}{%
\subsection{Idolatry and dependence on wealth and external power defy
the wrath and punishment of
God}\label{idolatry-and-dependence-on-wealth-and-external-power-defy-the-wrath-and-punishment-of-god}}

\bibleverse{6} For you have forsaken your people, the house of Jacob,
because they are filled from the east, with those who practice
divination like the Philistines, and they clasp hands with the children
of foreigners. \bibleverse{7} Their land is full of silver and gold,
neither is there any end of their treasures. Their land also is full of
horses, neither is there any end of their chariots. \bibleverse{8} Their
land also is full of idols. They worship the work of their own hands,
that which their own fingers have made. \bibleverse{9} Man is brought
low, and mankind is humbled; therefore don't forgive them.
\bibleverse{10} Enter into the rock, and hide in the dust, from before
the terror of Yahweh, and from the glory of his majesty. \bibleverse{11}
The lofty looks of man will be brought low, the arrogance of men will be
bowed down, and Yahweh alone will be exalted in that day.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-gods-judgment-on-all-earthly-sovereignty-and-human-pride}{%
\subsection{Announcement of God's judgment on all earthly sovereignty
and human
pride}\label{announcement-of-gods-judgment-on-all-earthly-sovereignty-and-human-pride}}

\bibleverse{12} For there will be a day of Yahweh of Armies for all that
is proud and arrogant, and for all that is lifted up, and it shall be
brought low--- \bibleverse{13} for all the cedars of Lebanon, that are
high and lifted up, for all the oaks of Bashan, \bibleverse{14} for all
the high mountains, for all the hills that are lifted up,
\bibleverse{15} for every lofty tower, for every fortified wall,
\bibleverse{16} for all the ships of Tarshish, and for all pleasant
imagery. \bibleverse{17} The loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and
the arrogance of men shall be brought low; and Yahweh alone shall be
exalted in that day.

\hypertarget{idols-in-particular-will-suffer-great-misfortune}{%
\subsection{Idols in particular will suffer great
misfortune}\label{idols-in-particular-will-suffer-great-misfortune}}

\bibleverse{18} The idols shall utterly pass away. \bibleverse{19} Men
shall go into the caves of the rocks, and into the holes of the earth,
from before the terror of Yahweh, and from the glory of his majesty,
when he arises to shake the earth mightily. \bibleverse{20} In that day,
men shall cast away their idols of silver and their idols of gold, which
have been made for themselves to worship, to the moles and to the bats,
\bibleverse{21} to go into the caverns of the rocks, and into the clefts
of the ragged rocks, from before the terror of Yahweh, and from the
glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake the earth mightily.
\bibleverse{22} Stop trusting in man, whose breath is in his nostrils;
for of what account is he?

\hypertarget{the-collapse-of-the-state-of-judea-as-punishment-for-misgovernment}{%
\subsection{The collapse of the state of Judea as punishment for
misgovernment}\label{the-collapse-of-the-state-of-judea-as-punishment-for-misgovernment}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} For, behold,\footnote{\textbf{3:1} ``Behold'', from
  ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze
  at. It is often used as an interjection.} the Lord, Yahweh of Armies,
takes away from Jerusalem and from Judah supply and support, the whole
supply of bread, and the whole supply of water; \bibleverse{2} the
mighty man, the man of war, the judge, the prophet, the diviner, the
elder, \bibleverse{3} the captain of fifty, the honorable man, the
counselor, the skilled craftsman, and the clever enchanter.
\bibleverse{4} I will give boys to be their princes, and children shall
rule over them. \bibleverse{5} The people will be oppressed, everyone by
another, and everyone by his neighbor. The child will behave himself
proudly against the old man, and the wicked against the honorable.
\bibleverse{6} Indeed a man shall take hold of his brother in the house
of his father, saying, ``You have clothing, you be our ruler, and let
this ruin be under your hand.'' \bibleverse{7} In that day he will cry
out, saying, ``I will not be a healer; for in my house is neither bread
nor clothing. You shall not make me ruler of the people.''
\bibleverse{8} For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen; because
their tongue and their doings are against Yahweh, to provoke the eyes of
his glory. \bibleverse{9} The look of their faces testify against them.
They parade their sin like Sodom. They don't hide it. Woe to their soul!
For they have brought disaster upon themselves. \bibleverse{10} Tell the
righteous that it will be well with them, for they will eat the fruit of
their deeds. \bibleverse{11} Woe to the wicked! Disaster is upon them,
for the deeds of their hands will be paid back to them. \bibleverse{12}
As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over
them. My people, those who lead you cause you to err, and destroy the
way of your paths.

\hypertarget{god-announces-judgment-to-the-head-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{God announces judgment to the head of the
people}\label{god-announces-judgment-to-the-head-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{13} Yahweh stands up to contend, and stands to judge the
peoples. \bibleverse{14} Yahweh will enter into judgment with the elders
of his people and their leaders: ``It is you who have eaten up the
vineyard. The plunder of the poor is in your houses. \bibleverse{15}
What do you mean that you crush my people, and grind the face of the
poor?'' says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies.

\hypertarget{gods-judgment-on-the-haughty-and-degenerate-women-of-the-upper-classes-of-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{God's judgment on the haughty and degenerate women of the
upper classes of
Jerusalem}\label{gods-judgment-on-the-haughty-and-degenerate-women-of-the-upper-classes-of-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{16} Moreover Yahweh said, ``Because the daughters of Zion
are arrogant, and walk with outstretched necks and flirting eyes,
walking daintily as they go, jingling ornaments on their feet;
\bibleverse{17} therefore the Lord brings sores on the crown of the head
of the women of Zion, and Yahweh will make their scalps bald.''
\bibleverse{18} In that day the Lord will take away the beauty of their
anklets, the headbands, the crescent necklaces, \bibleverse{19} the
earrings, the bracelets, the veils, \bibleverse{20} the headdresses, the
ankle chains, the sashes, the perfume containers, the charms,
\bibleverse{21} the signet rings, the nose rings, \bibleverse{22} the
fine robes, the capes, the cloaks, the purses, \bibleverse{23} the hand
mirrors, the fine linen garments, the tiaras, and the shawls.
\bibleverse{24} It shall happen that instead of sweet spices, there
shall be rottenness; instead of a belt, a rope; instead of well set
hair, baldness; instead of a robe, a wearing of sackcloth; and branding
instead of beauty.

\hypertarget{the-city-stripped-of-its-men}{%
\subsection{The city stripped of its
men}\label{the-city-stripped-of-its-men}}

\bibleverse{25} Your men shall fall by the sword, and your mighty in the
war. \bibleverse{26} Her gates shall lament and mourn. She shall be
desolate and sit on the ground.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Seven women shall take hold of one man in that day,
saying, ``We will eat our own bread, and wear our own clothing. Just let
us be called by your name. Take away our reproach.''

\hypertarget{glory-of-the-purified-jerusalem-after-the-judgment-of-the-world-under-the-personal-protection-of-god}{%
\subsection{Glory of the purified Jerusalem after the judgment of the
world under the personal protection of
God}\label{glory-of-the-purified-jerusalem-after-the-judgment-of-the-world-under-the-personal-protection-of-god}}

\bibleverse{2} In that day, Yahweh's branch will be beautiful and
glorious, and the fruit of the land will be the beauty and glory of the
survivors of Israel. \bibleverse{3} It will happen that he who is left
in Zion and he who remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, even
everyone who is written among the living in Jerusalem, \bibleverse{4}
when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion,
and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from within it, by the
spirit of justice and by the spirit of burning. \bibleverse{5} Yahweh
will create over the whole habitation of Mount Zion and over her
assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire
by night, for over all the glory will be a canopy. \bibleverse{6} There
will be a pavilion for a shade in the daytime from the heat, and for a
refuge and for a shelter from storm and from rain.

\hypertarget{the-parable-of-the-barren-vineyard}{%
\subsection{The parable of the barren
vineyard}\label{the-parable-of-the-barren-vineyard}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Let me sing for my well beloved a song of my beloved
about his vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard on a very fruitful hill.
\bibleverse{2} He dug it up, gathered out its stones, planted it with
the choicest vine, built a tower in the middle of it, and also cut out a
wine press in it. He looked for it to yield grapes, but it yielded wild
grapes. \bibleverse{3} ``Now, inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,
please judge between me and my vineyard. \bibleverse{4} What could have
been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? Why, when I
looked for it to yield grapes, did it yield wild grapes? \bibleverse{5}
Now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard. I will take away its
hedge, and it will be eaten up. I will break down its wall, and it will
be trampled down. \bibleverse{6} I will lay it a wasteland. It won't be
pruned or hoed, but it will grow briers and thorns. I will also command
the clouds that they rain no rain on it.'' \bibleverse{7} For the
vineyard of Yahweh of Armies is the house of Israel, and the men of
Judah his pleasant plant. He looked for justice, but behold, oppression,
for righteousness, but behold, a cry of distress.

\hypertarget{six-woes-of-the-prophet-for-the-sins-and-vices-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{Six woes of the prophet for the sins and vices of the
people}\label{six-woes-of-the-prophet-for-the-sins-and-vices-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{8} Woe to those who join house to house, who lay field to
field, until there is no room, and you are made to dwell alone in the
middle of the land! \bibleverse{9} In my ears, Yahweh of Armies says:
``Surely many houses will be desolate, even great and beautiful,
unoccupied. \bibleverse{10} For ten acres\footnote{\textbf{5:10}
  literally, ten yokes, or the amount of land that ten yokes of oxen can
  plow in one day, which is about 10 acres or 4 hectares.} of vineyard
shall yield one bath,\footnote{\textbf{5:10} 1 bath is about 22 liters
  or 5.8 U. S. gallons} and a homer\footnote{\textbf{5:10} 1 homer is
  about 220 liters or 6 bushels} of seed shall yield an
ephah.''\footnote{\textbf{5:10} 1 ephah is about 22 liters or 0.6
  bushels or about 2 pecks---only one tenth of what was sown.}
\bibleverse{11} Woe to those who rise up early in the morning, that they
may follow strong drink, who stay late into the night, until wine
inflames them! \bibleverse{12} The harp, lyre, tambourine, and flute,
with wine, are at their feasts; but they don't respect the work of
Yahweh, neither have they considered the operation of his hands.
\bibleverse{13} Therefore my people go into captivity for lack of
knowledge. Their honorable men are famished, and their multitudes are
parched with thirst. \bibleverse{14} Therefore Sheol\footnote{\textbf{5:14}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} has enlarged its desire, and opened
its mouth without measure; and their glory, their multitude, their pomp,
and he who rejoices among them, descend into it. \bibleverse{15} So man
is brought low, mankind is humbled, and the eyes of the arrogant ones
are humbled; \bibleverse{16} but Yahweh of Armies is exalted in justice,
and God the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness. \bibleverse{17}
Then the lambs will graze as in their pasture, and strangers will eat
the ruins of the rich. \bibleverse{18} Woe to those who draw iniquity
with cords of falsehood, and wickedness as with cart rope,
\bibleverse{19} who say, ``Let him make haste, let him hasten his work,
that we may see it; let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw near
and come, that we may know it!'' \bibleverse{20} Woe to those who call
evil good, and good evil; who put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; who put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!
\bibleverse{21} Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent
in their own sight! \bibleverse{22} Woe to those who are mighty to drink
wine, and champions at mixing strong drink; \bibleverse{23} who acquit
the guilty for a bribe, but deny justice for the innocent!
\bibleverse{24} Therefore as the tongue of fire devours the stubble, and
as the dry grass sinks down in the flame, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust, because they have
rejected the law of Yahweh of Armies, and despised the word of the Holy
One of Israel.

\hypertarget{gods-destructive-judgment-threatened-by-the-terrible-enemy-assyrian}{%
\subsection{God's destructive judgment threatened by the terrible enemy
(Assyrian)}\label{gods-destructive-judgment-threatened-by-the-terrible-enemy-assyrian}}

\bibleverse{25} Therefore Yahweh's anger burns against his people, and
he has stretched out his hand against them and has struck them. The
mountains tremble, and their dead bodies are as refuse in the middle of
the streets. For all this, his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
still stretched out. \bibleverse{26} He will lift up a banner to the
nations from far away, and he will whistle for them from the end of the
earth. Behold, they will come speedily and swiftly. \bibleverse{27} No
one shall be weary nor stumble among them; no one shall slumber nor
sleep, neither shall the belt of their waist be untied, nor the strap of
their sandals be broken, \bibleverse{28} whose arrows are sharp, and all
their bows bent. Their horses' hoofs will be like flint, and their
wheels like a whirlwind. \bibleverse{29} Their roaring will be like a
lioness. They will roar like young lions. Yes, they shall roar, and
seize their prey and carry it off, and there will be no one to deliver.
\bibleverse{30} They will roar against them in that day like the roaring
of the sea. If one looks to the land, behold, darkness and distress. The
light is darkened in its clouds.

\hypertarget{the-call-and-consecration-of-isaiah-as-a-prophet}{%
\subsection{The call and consecration of Isaiah as a
prophet}\label{the-call-and-consecration-of-isaiah-as-a-prophet}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting
on a throne, high and lifted up; and his train filled the temple.
\bibleverse{2} Above him stood the seraphim. Each one had six wings.
With two he covered his face. With two he covered his feet. With two he
flew. \bibleverse{3} One called to another, and said, ``Holy, holy,
holy, is Yahweh of Armies! The whole earth is full of his glory!''
\bibleverse{4} The foundations of the thresholds shook at the voice of
him who called, and the house was filled with smoke. \bibleverse{5} Then
I said, ``Woe is me! For I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips
and I live among a people of unclean lips, for my eyes have seen the
King, Yahweh of Armies!'' \bibleverse{6} Then one of the seraphim flew
to me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs
from off the altar. \bibleverse{7} He touched my mouth with it, and
said, ``Behold, this has touched your lips; and your iniquity is taken
away, and your sin forgiven.''

\hypertarget{gods-commission-to-the-prophet-to-increase-the-stubbornness-of-the-people-through-his-sermon-and-prepare-the-most-difficult-judgments}{%
\subsection{God's commission to the prophet to increase the stubbornness
of the people through his sermon and prepare the most difficult
judgments}\label{gods-commission-to-the-prophet-to-increase-the-stubbornness-of-the-people-through-his-sermon-and-prepare-the-most-difficult-judgments}}

\bibleverse{8} I heard the Lord's voice, saying, ``Whom shall I send,
and who will go for us?'' Then I said, ``Here I am. Send me!''
\bibleverse{9} He said, ``Go, and tell this people, `You hear indeed,
but don't understand. You see indeed, but don't perceive.'
\bibleverse{10} Make the heart of this people fat. Make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, hear with
their ears, understand with their heart, and turn again, and be
healed.'' \bibleverse{11} Then I said, ``Lord, how long?'' He answered,
``Until cities are waste without inhabitant, houses without man, the
land becomes utterly waste, \bibleverse{12} and Yahweh has removed men
far away, and the forsaken places are many within the land.
\bibleverse{13} If there is a tenth left in it, that also will in turn
be consumed, as a terebinth, and as an oak whose stump remains when they
are cut down, so the holy seed is its stump.''

\hypertarget{isaiahs-encouragement-to-king-ahaz-after-the-outbreak-of-the-syrian-ephraimite-war}{%
\subsection{Isaiah's encouragement to King Ahaz after the outbreak of
the Syrian-Ephraimite
war}\label{isaiahs-encouragement-to-king-ahaz-after-the-outbreak-of-the-syrian-ephraimite-war}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} In the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah,
king of Judah, Rezin the king of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah,
king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it, but could not
prevail against it. \bibleverse{2} David's house was told, ``Syria is
allied with Ephraim.'' His heart trembled, and the heart of his people,
as the trees of the forest tremble with the wind. \bibleverse{3} Then
Yahweh said to Isaiah, ``Go out now to meet Ahaz, you, and Shearjashub
your son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, on the highway of
the fuller's field. \bibleverse{4} Tell him, `Be careful, and keep calm.
Don't be afraid, neither let your heart be faint because of these two
tails of smoking torches, for the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria, and
of the son of Remaliah. \bibleverse{5} Because Syria, Ephraim, and the
son of Remaliah, have plotted evil against you, saying, \bibleverse{6}
``Let's go up against Judah, and tear it apart, and let's divide it
among ourselves, and set up a king within it, even the son of Tabeel.''
\bibleverse{7} This is what the Lord Yahweh says: ``It shall not stand,
neither shall it happen.'' \bibleverse{8} For the head of Syria is
Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin. Within sixty-five years
Ephraim shall be broken in pieces, so that it shall not be a people.
\bibleverse{9} The head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria
is Remaliah's son. If you will not believe, surely you shall not be
established.'\,''

\hypertarget{isaiahs-threatening-speech-to-the-unbelieving-ahaz-the-immanuel-sign-the-future-desolation-of-judah}{%
\subsection{Isaiah's threatening speech to the unbelieving Ahaz; the
immanuel sign; the future desolation of
Judah}\label{isaiahs-threatening-speech-to-the-unbelieving-ahaz-the-immanuel-sign-the-future-desolation-of-judah}}

\bibleverse{10} Yahweh spoke again to Ahaz, saying, \bibleverse{11}
``Ask a sign of Yahweh your God; ask it either in the depth, or in the
height above.'' \bibleverse{12} But Ahaz said, ``I won't ask. I won't
tempt Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{13} He said, ``Listen now, house of David.
Is it not enough for you to try the patience of men, that you will try
the patience of my God also? \bibleverse{14} Therefore the Lord himself
will give you a sign. Behold, the virgin will conceive, and bear a son,
and shall call his name Immanuel.\footnote{\textbf{7:14} ``Immanuel''
  means ``God with us''.} \bibleverse{15} He shall eat butter and honey
when he knows to refuse the evil and choose the good. \bibleverse{16}
For before the child knows to refuse the evil and choose the good, the
land whose two kings you abhor shall be forsaken. \bibleverse{17} Yahweh
will bring on you, on your people, and on your father's house days that
have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah, even the
king of Assyria.

\hypertarget{sign-of-future-judgment-for-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Sign of future judgment for
Jerusalem}\label{sign-of-future-judgment-for-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{18} It will happen in that day that Yahweh will whistle for
the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for
the bee that is in the land of Assyria. \bibleverse{19} They shall come,
and shall all rest in the desolate valleys, in the clefts of the rocks,
on all thorn hedges, and on all pastures. \bibleverse{20} In that day
the Lord will shave with a razor that is hired in the parts beyond the
River, even with the king of Assyria, the head and the hair of the feet;
and it shall also consume the beard. \bibleverse{21} It shall happen in
that day that a man shall keep alive a young cow, and two sheep.
\bibleverse{22} It shall happen, that because of the abundance of milk
which they shall give he shall eat butter, for everyone will eat butter
and honey that is left within the land. \bibleverse{23} It will happen
in that day that every place where there were a thousand vines worth a
thousand silver shekels,\footnote{\textbf{7:23} A shekel is about 10
  grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 1000 shekels is about 10 kilograms or
  22 pounds.} will be for briers and thorns. \bibleverse{24} People will
go there with arrows and with bow, because all the land will be briers
and thorns. \bibleverse{25} All the hills that were cultivated with the
hoe, you shall not come there for fear of briers and thorns; but it
shall be for the sending out of oxen, and for sheep to tread on.''

\hypertarget{prophecy-of-the-conquest-of-damascus-and-samaria-by-the-assyrians}{%
\subsection{Prophecy of the conquest of Damascus and Samaria by the
Assyrians}\label{prophecy-of-the-conquest-of-damascus-and-samaria-by-the-assyrians}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh said to me, ``Take a large tablet, and write on it
with a man's pen, `For Maher Shalal Hash Baz';\footnote{\textbf{8:1}
  ``Maher Shalal Hash Baz'' means ``quick to the plunder, swift to the
  prey''.} \bibleverse{2} and I will take for myself faithful witnesses
to testify: Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.''
\bibleverse{3} I went to the prophetess, and she conceived, and bore a
son. Then Yahweh said to me, ``Call his name `Maher Shalal Hash Baz.'
\bibleverse{4} For before the child knows how to say, `My father' and
`My mother,' the riches of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria will be
carried away by the king of Assyria.''

\hypertarget{prophecy-of-the-destruction-of-judah-by-the-assyrians}{%
\subsection{Prophecy of the destruction of Judah by the
Assyrians}\label{prophecy-of-the-destruction-of-judah-by-the-assyrians}}

\bibleverse{5} Yahweh spoke to me yet again, saying, \bibleverse{6}
``Because this people has refused the waters of Shiloah that go softly,
and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son; \bibleverse{7} now therefore,
behold, the Lord brings upon them the mighty flood waters of the River:
the king of Assyria and all his glory. It will come up over all its
channels, and go over all its banks. \bibleverse{8} It will sweep onward
into Judah. It will overflow and pass through. It will reach even to the
neck. The stretching out of its wings will fill the width of your land,
O Immanuel.

\hypertarget{the-prophet-announces-the-failure-of-his-plans-to-the-people}{%
\subsection{The prophet announces the failure of his plans to the
people}\label{the-prophet-announces-the-failure-of-his-plans-to-the-people}}

\bibleverse{9} Make an uproar, you peoples, and be broken in pieces!
Listen, all you from far countries: dress for battle, and be shattered!
Dress for battle, and be shattered! \bibleverse{10} Take counsel
together, and it will be brought to nothing; speak the word, and it will
not stand, for God is with us.''

\hypertarget{the-real-danger-does-not-come-from-human-plans-and-agreements-but-from-contempt-for-god}{%
\subsection{The real danger does not come from human plans and
agreements, but from contempt for
God}\label{the-real-danger-does-not-come-from-human-plans-and-agreements-but-from-contempt-for-god}}

\bibleverse{11} For Yahweh spoke this to me with a strong hand, and
instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying,
\bibleverse{12} ``Don't call a conspiracy all that this people call a
conspiracy. Don't fear their threats or be terrorized. \bibleverse{13}
Yahweh of Armies is who you must respect as holy. He is the one you must
fear. He is the one you must dread. \bibleverse{14} He will be a
sanctuary, but for both houses of Israel, he will be a stumbling stone
and a rock that makes them fall. For the people of Jerusalem, he will be
a trap and a snare. \bibleverse{15} Many will stumble over it, fall, be
broken, be snared, and be captured.''

\hypertarget{isaiahs-firm-confidence-in-the-truth-of-gods-words-made-to-him}{%
\subsection{Isaiah's firm confidence in the truth of God's words made to
him}\label{isaiahs-firm-confidence-in-the-truth-of-gods-words-made-to-him}}

\bibleverse{16} Wrap up the covenant. Seal the law among my disciples.
\bibleverse{17} I will wait for Yahweh, who hides his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him. \bibleverse{18} Behold, I and
the children whom Yahweh has given me are for signs and for wonders in
Israel from Yahweh of Armies, who dwells in Mount Zion.

\hypertarget{the-madness-and-destructive-consequences-of-gods-apostasy-for-the-people}{%
\subsection{The madness and destructive consequences of God's apostasy
for the
people}\label{the-madness-and-destructive-consequences-of-gods-apostasy-for-the-people}}

\bibleverse{19} When they tell you, ``Consult with those who have
familiar spirits and with the wizards, who chirp and who mutter,''
shouldn't a people consult with their God? Should they consult the dead
on behalf of the living? \bibleverse{20} Turn to the law and to the
covenant! If they don't speak according to this word, surely there is no
morning for them. \bibleverse{21} They will pass through it, very
distressed and hungry. It will happen that when they are hungry, they
will worry, and curse their king and their God. They will turn their
faces upward, \bibleverse{22} then look to the earth and see distress,
darkness, and the gloom of anguish. They will be driven into thick
darkness.

\hypertarget{prophecy-of-the-establishment-of-the-kingdom-of-god-by-the-promised-descendant-of-david}{%
\subsection{Prophecy of the establishment of the kingdom of God by the
promised descendant of
David}\label{prophecy-of-the-establishment-of-the-kingdom-of-god-by-the-promised-descendant-of-david}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} But there shall be no more gloom for her who was in
anguish. In the former time, he brought into contempt the land of
Zebulun and the land of Naphtali; but in the latter time he has made it
glorious, by the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the
nations. \bibleverse{2} The people who walked in darkness have seen a
great light. The light has shined on those who lived in the land of the
shadow of death. \bibleverse{3} You have multiplied the nation. You have
increased their joy. They rejoice before you according to the joy in
harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the plunder. \bibleverse{4} For
the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his
oppressor, you have broken as in the day of Midian. \bibleverse{5} For
all the armor of the armed man in the noisy battle, and the garments
rolled in blood, will be for burning, fuel for the fire. \bibleverse{6}
For a child is born to us. A son is given to us; and the government will
be on his shoulders. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty
God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. \bibleverse{7} Of the increase
of his government and of peace there shall be no end, on David's throne,
and on his kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it with justice and
with righteousness from that time on, even forever. The zeal of Yahweh
of Armies will perform this.

\hypertarget{the-punishments-of-the-haughty-northern-kingdom-of-ephraim-have-had-no-effect-on-all-of-israel}{%
\subsection{The punishments of the haughty northern kingdom of Ephraim
have had no effect on all of
Israel}\label{the-punishments-of-the-haughty-northern-kingdom-of-ephraim-have-had-no-effect-on-all-of-israel}}

\bibleverse{8} The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it falls on Israel.
\bibleverse{9} All the people will know, including Ephraim and the
inhabitants of Samaria, who say in pride and in arrogance of heart,
\bibleverse{10} ``The bricks have fallen, but we will build with cut
stone. The sycamore fig trees have been cut down, but we will put cedars
in their place.'' \bibleverse{11} Therefore Yahweh will set up on high
against him the adversaries of Rezin, and will stir up his enemies,
\bibleverse{12} The Syrians in front, and the Philistines behind; and
they will devour Israel with open mouth. For all this, his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

\hypertarget{unrepentant-people-have-also-not-improved-with-the-massive-losses-of-people}{%
\subsection{Unrepentant people have also not improved with the massive
losses of
people}\label{unrepentant-people-have-also-not-improved-with-the-massive-losses-of-people}}

\bibleverse{13} Yet the people have not turned to him who struck them,
neither have they sought Yahweh of Armies. \bibleverse{14} Therefore
Yahweh will cut off from Israel head and tail, palm branch and reed, in
one day. \bibleverse{15} The elder and the honorable man is the head,
and the prophet who teaches lies is the tail. \bibleverse{16} For those
who lead this people lead them astray; and those who are led by them are
destroyed. \bibleverse{17} Therefore the Lord will not rejoice over
their young men, neither will he have compassion on their fatherless and
widows; for everyone is profane and an evildoer, and every mouth speaks
folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

\hypertarget{inexorably-progressive-inner-self-destruction}{%
\subsection{Inexorably progressive inner
self-destruction}\label{inexorably-progressive-inner-self-destruction}}

\bibleverse{18} For wickedness burns like a fire. It devours the briers
and thorns; yes, it kindles in the thickets of the forest, and they roll
upward in a column of smoke. \bibleverse{19} Through Yahweh of Armies'
wrath, the land is burned up; and the people are the fuel for the fire.
No one spares his brother. \bibleverse{20} One will devour on the right
hand, and be hungry; and he will eat on the left hand, and they will not
be satisfied. Everyone will eat the flesh of his own arm:
\bibleverse{21} Manasseh eating Ephraim and Ephraim eating Manasseh, and
they together will be against Judah. For all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

\hypertarget{woe-to-the-despicable-heads-of-the-people-a-terrible-fate-awaits-you}{%
\subsection{Woe to the despicable heads of the people! A terrible fate
awaits
you}\label{woe-to-the-despicable-heads-of-the-people-a-terrible-fate-awaits-you}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to those who decree unrighteous decrees, and to the
writers who write oppressive decrees \bibleverse{2} to deprive the needy
of justice, and to rob the poor among my people of their rights, that
widows may be their plunder, and that they may make the fatherless their
prey! \bibleverse{3} What will you do in the day of visitation, and in
the desolation which will come from afar? To whom will you flee for
help? Where will you leave your wealth? \bibleverse{4} They will only
bow down under the prisoners, and will fall under the slain. For all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

\hypertarget{assyria-has-arrogantly-transgressed-gods-command}{%
\subsection{Assyria has arrogantly transgressed God's
command}\label{assyria-has-arrogantly-transgressed-gods-command}}

\bibleverse{5} Alas Assyrian, the rod of my anger, the staff in whose
hand is my indignation! \bibleverse{6} I will send him against a profane
nation, and against the people who anger me I will give him a command to
take the plunder and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the
mire of the streets. \bibleverse{7} However, he doesn't mean so, neither
does his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut
off not a few nations. \bibleverse{8} For he says, ``Aren't all of my
princes kings? \bibleverse{9} Isn't Calno like Carchemish? Isn't Hamath
like Arpad? Isn't Samaria like Damascus?'' \bibleverse{10} As my hand
has found the kingdoms of the idols, whose engraved images exceeded
those of Jerusalem and of Samaria, \bibleverse{11} shall I not, as I
have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?

\hypertarget{divine-judgment-on-assyrian-arrogance}{%
\subsection{Divine judgment on Assyrian
arrogance}\label{divine-judgment-on-assyrian-arrogance}}

\bibleverse{12} Therefore it will happen that when the Lord has
performed his whole work on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish
the fruit of the willful proud heart of the king of Assyria, and the
insolence of his arrogant looks. \bibleverse{13} For he has said, ``By
the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, for I have
understanding. I have removed the boundaries of the peoples, and have
robbed their treasures. Like a valiant man I have brought down their
rulers. \bibleverse{14} My hand has found the riches of the peoples like
a nest, and like one gathers eggs that are abandoned, I have gathered
all the earth. There was no one who moved their wing, or that opened
their mouth, or chirped.'' \bibleverse{15} Should an ax brag against him
who chops with it? Should a saw exalt itself above him who saws with it?
As if a rod should lift those who lift it up, or as if a staff should
lift up someone who is not wood. \bibleverse{16} Therefore the Lord,
Yahweh of Armies, will send among his fat ones leanness; and under his
glory a burning will be kindled like the burning of fire.
\bibleverse{17} The light of Israel will be for a fire, and his Holy One
for a flame; and it will burn and devour his thorns and his briers in
one day. \bibleverse{18} He will consume the glory of his forest and of
his fruitful field, both soul and body. It will be as when a standard
bearer faints. \bibleverse{19} The remnant of the trees of his forest
shall be few, so that a child could write their number.

\hypertarget{the-salvation-of-the-remnant-of-israel-repaired-by-the-visitation}{%
\subsection{The salvation of the remnant of Israel, repaired by the
Visitation}\label{the-salvation-of-the-remnant-of-israel-repaired-by-the-visitation}}

\bibleverse{20} It will come to pass in that day that the remnant of
Israel, and those who have escaped from the house of Jacob will no more
again lean on him who struck them, but shall lean on Yahweh, the Holy
One of Israel, in truth. \bibleverse{21} A remnant will return, even the
remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God. \bibleverse{22} For though your
people, Israel, are like the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them
will return. A destruction is determined, overflowing with
righteousness. \bibleverse{23} For the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, will make
a full end, and that determined, throughout all the earth.

\hypertarget{god-encourages-his-people-by-announcing-the-destruction-of-the-approaching-enemy}{%
\subsection{God encourages his people by announcing the destruction of
the approaching
enemy}\label{god-encourages-his-people-by-announcing-the-destruction-of-the-approaching-enemy}}

\bibleverse{24} Therefore the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, says, ``My people
who dwell in Zion, don't be afraid of the Assyrian, though he strike you
with the rod, and lift up his staff against you, as Egypt did.
\bibleverse{25} For yet a very little while, and the indignation against
you will be accomplished, and my anger will be directed to his
destruction.'' \bibleverse{26} Yahweh of Armies will stir up a scourge
against him, as in the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb. His rod
will be over the sea, and he will lift it up like he did against Egypt.
\bibleverse{27} It will happen in that day that his burden will depart
from off your shoulder, and his yoke from off your neck, and the yoke
shall be destroyed because of the anointing oil.

\hypertarget{the-approach-of-the-enemy-from-the-north-and-its-destruction-before-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{The approach of the enemy from the north and its destruction
before
Jerusalem}\label{the-approach-of-the-enemy-from-the-north-and-its-destruction-before-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{28} He has come to Aiath. He has passed through Migron. At
Michmash he stores his baggage. \bibleverse{29} They have gone over the
pass. They have taken up their lodging at Geba. Ramah trembles. Gibeah
of Saul has fled. \bibleverse{30} Cry aloud with your voice, daughter of
Gallim! Listen, Laishah! You poor Anathoth! \bibleverse{31} Madmenah is
a fugitive. The inhabitants of Gebim flee for safety. \bibleverse{32}
This very day he will halt at Nob. He shakes his hand at the mountain of
the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{33} Behold, the
Lord, Yahweh of Armies, will lop the boughs with terror. The tall will
be cut down, and the lofty will be brought low. \bibleverse{34} He will
cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon will fall by
the Mighty One.

\hypertarget{the-offspring-of-david-was-filled-with-the-spirit-of-god-as-the-founder-of-the-future-kingdom-of-peace}{%
\subsection{The offspring of David was filled with the spirit of God as
the founder of the future kingdom of
peace}\label{the-offspring-of-david-was-filled-with-the-spirit-of-god-as-the-founder-of-the-future-kingdom-of-peace}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} A shoot will come out of the stock of Jesse, and a branch
out of his roots will bear fruit. \bibleverse{2} Yahweh's Spirit will
rest on him: the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Yahweh.
\bibleverse{3} His delight will be in the fear of Yahweh. He will not
judge by the sight of his eyes, neither decide by the hearing of his
ears; \bibleverse{4} but he will judge the poor with righteousness, and
decide with equity for the humble of the earth. He will strike the earth
with the rod of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips he will kill
the wicked. \bibleverse{5} Righteousness will be the belt around his
waist, and faithfulness the belt around his waist. \bibleverse{6} The
wolf will live with the lamb, and the leopard will lie down with the
young goat, the calf, the young lion, and the fattened calf together;
and a little child will lead them. \bibleverse{7} The cow and the bear
will graze. Their young ones will lie down together. The lion will eat
straw like the ox. \bibleverse{8} The nursing child will play near a
cobra's hole, and the weaned child will put his hand on the viper's den.
\bibleverse{9} They will not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain;
for the earth will be full of the knowledge of Yahweh, as the waters
cover the sea.

\hypertarget{the-gathering-of-the-scattered-people-of-god-and-the-glory-of-the-messiahs-kingdom-to-the-outside-world}{%
\subsection{The gathering of the scattered people of God and the glory
of the Messiah's kingdom to the outside
world}\label{the-gathering-of-the-scattered-people-of-god-and-the-glory-of-the-messiahs-kingdom-to-the-outside-world}}

\bibleverse{10} It will happen in that day that the nations will seek
the root of Jesse, who stands as a banner of the peoples; and his
resting place will be glorious. \bibleverse{11} It will happen in that
day that the Lord will set his hand again the second time to recover the
remnant that is left of his people from Assyria, from Egypt, from
Pathros, from Cush, from Elam, from Shinar, from Hamath, and from the
islands of the sea. \bibleverse{12} He will set up a banner for the
nations, and will assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together
the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
\bibleverse{13} The envy also of Ephraim will depart, and those who
persecute Judah will be cut off. Ephraim won't envy Judah, and Judah
won't persecute Ephraim. \bibleverse{14} They will fly down on the
shoulders of the Philistines on the west. Together they will plunder the
children of the east. They will extend their power over Edom and Moab,
and the children of Ammon will obey them. \bibleverse{15} Yahweh will
utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his scorching
wind he will wave his hand over the River, and will split it into seven
streams, and cause men to march over in sandals. \bibleverse{16} There
will be a highway for the remnant that is left of his people from
Assyria, like there was for Israel in the day that he came up out of the
land of Egypt.

\hypertarget{prayer-and-vows-of-thanks-from-the-church-zion-saved}{%
\subsection{Prayer and vows of thanks from the Church Zion
saved}\label{prayer-and-vows-of-thanks-from-the-church-zion-saved}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} In that day you will say, ``I will give thanks to you,
Yahweh; for though you were angry with me, your anger has turned away
and you comfort me. \bibleverse{2} Behold, God is my salvation. I will
trust, and will not be afraid; for Yah, Yahweh, is my strength and song;
and he has become my salvation.'' \bibleverse{3} Therefore with joy you
will draw water out of the wells of salvation. \bibleverse{4} In that
day you will say, ``Give thanks to Yahweh! Call on his name! Declare his
doings among the peoples! Proclaim that his name is exalted!
\bibleverse{5} Sing to Yahweh, for he has done excellent things! Let
this be known in all the earth! \bibleverse{6} Cry aloud and shout, you
inhabitant of Zion, for the Holy One of Israel is great among you!''

\hypertarget{judgment-on-the-city-of-babylon}{%
\subsection{Judgment on the city of
Babylon}\label{judgment-on-the-city-of-babylon}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-world-judgment-day-the-terrifying-approach-of-the-army-summoned-by-god}{%
\subsection{Announcement of World Judgment Day; the terrifying approach
of the army summoned by
God}\label{announcement-of-world-judgment-day-the-terrifying-approach-of-the-army-summoned-by-god}}

\bibleverse{2} Set up a banner on the bare mountain! Lift up your voice
to them! Wave your hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
\bibleverse{3} I have commanded my consecrated ones; yes, I have called
my mighty men for my anger, even my proudly exulting ones.
\bibleverse{4} The noise of a multitude is in the mountains, as of a
great people; the noise of an uproar of the kingdoms of the nations
gathered together! Yahweh of Armies is mustering the army for the
battle. \bibleverse{5} They come from a far country, from the uttermost
part of heaven, even Yahweh, and the weapons of his indignation, to
destroy the whole land. \bibleverse{6} Wail, for Yahweh's day is at
hand! It will come as destruction from the Almighty. \bibleverse{7}
Therefore all hands will be feeble, and everyone's heart will melt.
\bibleverse{8} They will be dismayed. Pangs and sorrows will seize them.
They will be in pain like a woman in labor. They will look in amazement
one at another. Their faces will be faces of flame.

\hypertarget{the-horrors-and-terrible-effects-of-this-judgment-day-also-in-nature}{%
\subsection{The horrors and terrible effects of this judgment day (also
in
nature)}\label{the-horrors-and-terrible-effects-of-this-judgment-day-also-in-nature}}

\bibleverse{9} Behold, the day of Yahweh comes, cruel, with wrath and
fierce anger; to make the land a desolation, and to destroy its sinners
out of it. \bibleverse{10} For the stars of the sky and its
constellations will not give their light. The sun will be darkened in
its going out, and the moon will not cause its light to shine.
\bibleverse{11} I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked
for their iniquity. I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease,
and will humble the arrogance of the terrible. \bibleverse{12} I will
make people more rare than fine gold, even a person than the pure gold
of Ophir. \bibleverse{13} Therefore I will make the heavens tremble, and
the earth will be shaken out of its place in Yahweh of Armies' wrath,
and in the day of his fierce anger. \bibleverse{14} It will happen that
like a hunted gazelle and like sheep that no one gathers, they will each
turn to their own people, and will each flee to their own land.
\bibleverse{15} Everyone who is found will be thrust through. Everyone
who is captured will fall by the sword. \bibleverse{16} Their infants
also will be dashed in pieces before their eyes. Their houses will be
ransacked, and their wives raped.

\hypertarget{the-conquest-and-destruction-of-babylon-by-the-medes}{%
\subsection{The conquest and destruction of Babylon by the
Medes}\label{the-conquest-and-destruction-of-babylon-by-the-medes}}

\bibleverse{17} Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, who will
not value silver, and as for gold, they will not delight in it.
\bibleverse{18} Their bows will dash the young men in pieces; and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb. Their eyes will not spare
children. \bibleverse{19} Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of
the Chaldeans' pride, will be like when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. \bibleverse{20} It will never be inhabited, neither will it be
lived in from generation to generation. The Arabian will not pitch a
tent there, neither will shepherds make their flocks lie down there.
\bibleverse{21} But wild animals of the desert will lie there, and their
houses will be full of jackals. Ostriches will dwell there, and wild
goats will frolic there. \bibleverse{22} Hyenas will cry in their
fortresses, and jackals in the pleasant palaces. Her time is near to
come, and her days will not be prolonged.

\hypertarget{god-will-restore-his-people-israel-by-mercy-after-the-fall-of-babylon}{%
\subsection{God will restore his people Israel by mercy after the fall
of
Babylon}\label{god-will-restore-his-people-israel-by-mercy-after-the-fall-of-babylon}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} For Yahweh will have compassion on Jacob, and will yet
choose Israel, and set them in their own land. The foreigner will join
himself with them, and they will unite with the house of Jacob.
\bibleverse{2} The peoples will take them, and bring them to their
place. The house of Israel will possess them in Yahweh's land for
servants and for handmaids. They will take as captives those whose
captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

\hypertarget{mocking-song-of-the-liberated-people-of-israel-about-the-overthrow-of-the-king-of-babylon}{%
\subsection{Mocking song of the liberated people of Israel about the
overthrow of the king of
Babylon}\label{mocking-song-of-the-liberated-people-of-israel-about-the-overthrow-of-the-king-of-babylon}}

\bibleverse{3} It will happen in the day that Yahweh will give you rest
from your sorrow, from your trouble, and from the hard service in which
you were made to serve,

\hypertarget{joy-of-all-the-earth-for-the-fall-of-the-mighty}{%
\subsection{Joy of all the earth for the fall of the
mighty}\label{joy-of-all-the-earth-for-the-fall-of-the-mighty}}

\bibleverse{4} that you will take up this parable against the king of
Babylon, and say, ``How the oppressor has ceased! The golden city has
ceased!'' \bibleverse{5} Yahweh has broken the staff of the wicked, the
scepter of the rulers, \bibleverse{6} who struck the peoples in wrath
with a continual stroke, who ruled the nations in anger, with a
persecution that no one restrained. \bibleverse{7} The whole earth is at
rest, and is quiet. They break out in song. \bibleverse{8} Yes, the
cypress trees rejoice with you, with the cedars of Lebanon, saying,
``Since you are humbled, no lumberjack has come up against us.''

\hypertarget{joyful-wonder-of-the-realm-of-the-dead}{%
\subsection{Joyful wonder of the realm of the
dead}\label{joyful-wonder-of-the-realm-of-the-dead}}

\bibleverse{9} Sheol\footnote{\textbf{14:9} Sheol is the place of the
  dead.} from beneath has moved for you to meet you at your coming. It
stirs up the departed spirits for you, even all the rulers of the earth.
It has raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.
\bibleverse{10} They all will answer and ask you, ``Have you also become
as weak as we are? Have you become like us?'' \bibleverse{11} Your pomp
is brought down to Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{14:11} Sheol is the place of
  the dead.} with the sound of your stringed instruments. Maggots are
spread out under you, and worms cover you.

\hypertarget{what-a-fall-for-the-presumptuous-what-a-shameful-ending}{%
\subsection{What a fall for the presumptuous! What a shameful
ending!}\label{what-a-fall-for-the-presumptuous-what-a-shameful-ending}}

\bibleverse{12} How you have fallen from heaven, shining one, son of the
dawn! How you are cut down to the ground, who laid the nations low!
\bibleverse{13} You said in your heart, ``I will ascend into heaven! I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God! I will sit on the mountain
of assembly, in the far north! \bibleverse{14} I will ascend above the
heights of the clouds! I will make myself like the Most High!''
\bibleverse{15} Yet you shall be brought down to Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{14:15}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} to the depths of the pit.
\bibleverse{16} Those who see you will stare at you. They will ponder
you, saying, ``Is this the man who made the earth to tremble, who shook
kingdoms, \bibleverse{17} who made the world like a wilderness, and
overthrew its cities, who didn't release his prisoners to their home?''
\bibleverse{18} All the kings of the nations sleep in glory, everyone in
his own house. \bibleverse{19} But you are cast away from your tomb like
an abominable branch, clothed with the slain who are thrust through with
the sword, who go down to the stones of the pit; like a dead body
trodden under foot. \bibleverse{20} You will not join them in burial,
because you have destroyed your land. You have killed your people. The
offspring of evildoers will not be named forever. \bibleverse{21}
Prepare for slaughter of his children because of the iniquity of their
fathers, that they not rise up and possess the earth, and fill the
surface of the world with cities.

\hypertarget{gods-affirmative-judgment-of-destruction}{%
\subsection{God's affirmative judgment of
destruction}\label{gods-affirmative-judgment-of-destruction}}

\bibleverse{22} ``I will rise up against them,'' says Yahweh of Armies,
``and cut off from Babylon name and remnant, and son and son's son,''
says Yahweh. \bibleverse{23} ``I will also make it a possession for the
porcupine, and pools of water. I will sweep it with the broom of
destruction,'' says Yahweh of Armies.

\hypertarget{threat-to-assyria-in-case-of-attack-on-israel}{%
\subsection{Threat to Assyria in case of attack on
Israel}\label{threat-to-assyria-in-case-of-attack-on-israel}}

\bibleverse{24} Yahweh of Armies has sworn, saying, ``Surely, as I have
thought, so shall it happen; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:
\bibleverse{25} that I will break the Assyrian in my land, and tread him
under foot on my mountains. Then his yoke will leave them, and his
burden leave their shoulders. \bibleverse{26} This is the plan that is
determined for the whole earth. This is the hand that is stretched out
over all the nations. \bibleverse{27} For Yahweh of Armies has planned,
and who can stop it? His hand is stretched out, and who can turn it
back?''

\hypertarget{threat-against-the-philistines-and-salvation-for-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Threat against the Philistines and salvation for
Jerusalem}\label{threat-against-the-philistines-and-salvation-for-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{28} This burden was in the year that King Ahaz died.
\bibleverse{29} Don't rejoice, O Philistia, all of you, because the rod
that struck you is broken; for out of the serpent's root an adder will
emerge, and his fruit will be a fiery flying serpent. \bibleverse{30}
The firstborn of the poor will eat, and the needy will lie down in
safety; and I will kill your root with famine, and your remnant will be
killed. \bibleverse{31} Howl, gate! Cry, city! You are melted away,
Philistia, all of you; for smoke comes out of the north, and there is no
straggler in his ranks. \bibleverse{32} What will they answer the
messengers of the nation? That Yahweh has founded Zion, and in her the
afflicted of his people will take refuge.

\hypertarget{lament-for-the-desolation-of-moab}{%
\subsection{Lament for the desolation of
Moab}\label{lament-for-the-desolation-of-moab}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of Moab. For in a night, Ar of Moab is laid
waste, and brought to nothing. For in a night Kir of Moab is laid waste,
and brought to nothing. \bibleverse{2} They have gone up to Bayith, and
to Dibon, to the high places, to weep. Moab wails over Nebo and over
Medeba. Baldness is on all of their heads. Every beard is cut off.
\bibleverse{3} In their streets, they clothe themselves in sackcloth. In
their streets and on their housetops, everyone wails, weeping
abundantly. \bibleverse{4} Heshbon cries out with Elealeh. Their voice
is heard even to Jahaz. Therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud. Their
souls tremble within them. \bibleverse{5} My heart cries out for Moab!
Her nobles flee to Zoar, to Eglath Shelishiyah; for they go up by the
ascent of Luhith with weeping; for on the way to Horonaim, they raise up
a cry of destruction. \bibleverse{6} For the waters of Nimrim will be
desolate; for the grass has withered away, the tender grass fails, there
is no green thing. \bibleverse{7} Therefore they will carry away the
abundance they have gotten, and that which they have stored up, over the
brook of the willows. \bibleverse{8} For the cry has gone around the
borders of Moab, its wailing to Eglaim, and its wailing to Beer Elim.
\bibleverse{9} For the waters of Dimon are full of blood; for I will
bring yet more on Dimon, a lion on those of Moab who escape, and on the
remnant of the land.

\hypertarget{a-request-for-help-from-the-fugitive-moabites-to-the-jewish-people}{%
\subsection{A request for help from the fugitive Moabites to the Jewish
people}\label{a-request-for-help-from-the-fugitive-moabites-to-the-jewish-people}}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} Send the lambs for the ruler of the land from Selah to
the wilderness, to the mountain of the daughter of Zion. \bibleverse{2}
For it will be that as wandering birds, as a scattered nest, so will the
daughters of Moab be at the fords of the Arnon. \bibleverse{3} Give
counsel! Execute justice! Make your shade like the night in the middle
of the noonday! Hide the outcasts! Don't betray the fugitive!
\bibleverse{4} Let my outcasts dwell with you! As for Moab, be a hiding
place for him from the face of the destroyer. For the extortionist is
brought to nothing. Destruction ceases. The oppressors are consumed out
of the land. \bibleverse{5} A throne will be established in loving
kindness. One will sit on it in truth, in the tent of David, judging,
seeking justice, and swift to do righteousness.

\hypertarget{help-request-rejected-new-doom-announcements}{%
\subsection{Help request rejected; new doom
announcements}\label{help-request-rejected-new-doom-announcements}}

\bibleverse{6} We have heard of the pride of Moab, that he is very
proud; even of his arrogance, his pride, and his wrath. His boastings
are nothing. \bibleverse{7} Therefore Moab will wail for Moab. Everyone
will wail. You will mourn for the raisin cakes of Kir Hareseth, utterly
stricken. \bibleverse{8} For the fields of Heshbon languish with the
vine of Sibmah. The lords of the nations have broken down its choice
branches, which reached even to Jazer, which wandered into the
wilderness. Its shoots were spread abroad. They passed over the sea.
\bibleverse{9} Therefore I will weep with the weeping of Jazer for the
vine of Sibmah. I will water you with my tears, Heshbon, and Elealeh:
for on your summer fruits and on your harvest the battle shout has
fallen. \bibleverse{10} Gladness is taken away, and joy out of the
fruitful field; and in the vineyards there will be no singing, neither
joyful noise. Nobody will tread out wine in the presses. I have made the
shouting stop. \bibleverse{11} Therefore my heart sounds like a harp for
Moab, and my inward parts for Kir Heres. \bibleverse{12} It will happen
that when Moab presents himself, when he wearies himself on the high
place, and comes to his sanctuary to pray, that he will not prevail.
\bibleverse{13} This is the word that Yahweh spoke concerning Moab in
time past. \bibleverse{14} But now Yahweh has spoken, saying, ``Within
three years, as a worker bound by contract would count them, the glory
of Moab shall be brought into contempt, with all his great multitude;
and the remnant will be very small and feeble.''

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-fall-of-the-kingdoms-of-damascus-and-israel}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the fall of the kingdoms of Damascus and
Israel}\label{announcement-of-the-fall-of-the-kingdoms-of-damascus-and-israel}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of Damascus. ``Behold, Damascus is taken away
from being a city, and it will be a ruinous heap. \bibleverse{2} The
cities of Aroer are forsaken. They will be for flocks, which shall lie
down, and no one shall make them afraid. \bibleverse{3} The fortress
shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant
of Syria. They will be as the glory of the children of Israel,'' says
Yahweh of Armies.

\hypertarget{description-of-the-future-destiny-of-israel-and-indication-of-the-reason-for-your-visit}{%
\subsection{Description of the future destiny of Israel and indication
of the reason for your
visit}\label{description-of-the-future-destiny-of-israel-and-indication-of-the-reason-for-your-visit}}

\bibleverse{4} ``It will happen in that day that the glory of Jacob will
be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh will become lean.
\bibleverse{5} It will be like when the harvester gathers the wheat, and
his arm reaps the grain. Yes, it will be like when one gleans grain in
the valley of Rephaim. \bibleverse{6} Yet gleanings will be left there,
like the shaking of an olive tree, two or three olives in the top of the
uppermost bough, four or five in the outermost branches of a fruitful
tree,'' says Yahweh, the God of Israel. \bibleverse{7} In that day,
people will look to their Maker, and their eyes will have respect for
the Holy One of Israel. \bibleverse{8} They will not look to the altars,
the work of their hands; neither shall they respect that which their
fingers have made, either the Asherah poles or the incense altars.
\bibleverse{9} In that day, their strong cities will be like the
forsaken places in the woods and on the mountain top, which were
forsaken from before the children of Israel; and it will be a
desolation. \bibleverse{10} For you have forgotten the God of your
salvation, and have not remembered the rock of your strength. Therefore
you plant pleasant plants, and set out foreign seedlings.
\bibleverse{11} In the day of your planting, you hedge it in. In the
morning, you make your seed blossom, but the harvest flees away in the
day of grief and of desperate sorrow.

\hypertarget{god-threatens-the-angry-peoples-the-opponents-of-gods-people}{%
\subsection{God threatens the angry peoples, the opponents of God's
people}\label{god-threatens-the-angry-peoples-the-opponents-of-gods-people}}

\bibleverse{12} Ah, the uproar of many peoples who roar like the roaring
of the seas; and the rushing of nations that rush like the rushing of
mighty waters! \bibleverse{13} The nations will rush like the rushing of
many waters, but he will rebuke them, and they will flee far off, and
will be chased like the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like
the whirling dust before the storm. \bibleverse{14} At evening, behold,
terror! Before the morning, they are no more. This is the portion of
those who plunder us, and the lot of those who rob us.

\hypertarget{gods-message-to-the-ethiopian-ambassadors-in-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{God's message to the Ethiopian ambassadors in
Jerusalem}\label{gods-message-to-the-ethiopian-ambassadors-in-jerusalem}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} Ah, the land of the rustling of wings, which is beyond
the rivers of Ethiopia; \bibleverse{2} that sends ambassadors by the
sea, even in vessels of papyrus on the waters, saying, ``Go, you swift
messengers, to a nation tall and smooth, to a people awesome from their
beginning onward, a nation that measures out and treads down, whose land
the rivers divide!'' \bibleverse{3} All you inhabitants of the world,
and you dwellers on the earth, when a banner is lifted up on the
mountains, look! When the trumpet is blown, listen! \bibleverse{4} For
Yahweh said to me, ``I will be still, and I will see in my dwelling
place, like clear heat in sunshine, like a cloud of dew in the heat of
harvest.'' \bibleverse{5} For before the harvest, when the blossom is
over, and the flower becomes a ripening grape, he will cut off the
sprigs with pruning hooks, and he will cut down and take away the
spreading branches. \bibleverse{6} They will be left together for the
ravenous birds of the mountains, and for the animals of the earth. The
ravenous birds will eat them in the summer, and all the animals of the
earth will eat them in the winter. \bibleverse{7} In that time, a
present will be brought to Yahweh of Armies from a people tall and
smooth, even from a people awesome from their beginning onward, a nation
that measures out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide, to the
place of the name of Yahweh of Armies, Mount Zion.

\hypertarget{the-tribulations-that-await-the-earth-by-the-intervention-of-god}{%
\subsection{The tribulations that await the earth by the intervention of
God}\label{the-tribulations-that-await-the-earth-by-the-intervention-of-god}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of Egypt. ``Behold, Yahweh rides on a swift
cloud, and comes to Egypt. The idols of Egypt will tremble at his
presence; and the heart of Egypt will melt within it. \bibleverse{2} I
will stir up the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they will fight
everyone against his brother, and everyone against his neighbor; city
against city, and kingdom against kingdom. \bibleverse{3} The spirit of
the Egyptians will fail within them. I will destroy their counsel. They
will seek the idols, the charmers, those who have familiar spirits, and
the wizards. \bibleverse{4} I will give over the Egyptians into the hand
of a cruel lord. A fierce king will rule over them,'' says the Lord,
Yahweh of Armies. \bibleverse{5} The waters will fail from the sea, and
the river will be wasted and become dry. \bibleverse{6} The rivers will
become foul. The streams of Egypt will be diminished and dried up. The
reeds and flags will wither away. \bibleverse{7} The meadows by the
Nile, by the brink of the Nile, and all the sown fields of the Nile,
will become dry, be driven away, and be no more. \bibleverse{8} The
fishermen will lament, and all those who fish in the Nile will mourn,
and those who spread nets on the waters will languish. \bibleverse{9}
Moreover those who work in combed flax, and those who weave white cloth,
will be confounded. \bibleverse{10} The pillars will be broken in
pieces. All those who work for hire will be grieved in soul.

\hypertarget{egyptian-state-leaders-are-at-a-loss}{%
\subsection{Egyptian state leaders are at a
loss}\label{egyptian-state-leaders-are-at-a-loss}}

\bibleverse{11} The princes of Zoan are utterly foolish. The counsel of
the wisest counselors of Pharaoh has become stupid. How do you say to
Pharaoh, ``I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?''
\bibleverse{12} Where then are your wise men? Let them tell you now; and
let them know what Yahweh of Armies has purposed concerning Egypt.
\bibleverse{13} The princes of Zoan have become fools. The princes of
Memphis are deceived. They have caused Egypt to go astray, those who are
the cornerstone of her tribes. \bibleverse{14} Yahweh has mixed a spirit
of perverseness in the middle of her; and they have caused Egypt to go
astray in all of its works, like a drunken man staggers in his vomit.
\bibleverse{15} Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which head or
tail, palm branch or rush, may do.

\hypertarget{the-egyptians-fear-of-god-and-his-people}{%
\subsection{The Egyptians' fear of God and his
people}\label{the-egyptians-fear-of-god-and-his-people}}

\bibleverse{16} In that day the Egyptians will be like women. They will
tremble and fear because of the shaking of Yahweh of Armies's hand,
which he shakes over them. \bibleverse{17} The land of Judah will become
a terror to Egypt. Everyone to whom mention is made of it will be
afraid, because of the plans of Yahweh of Armies, which he determines
against it.

\hypertarget{the-first-cities-of-egypt-and-the-worship-of-god-spread-among-the-egyptians}{%
\subsection{The first cities of Egypt and the worship of God spread
among the
Egyptians}\label{the-first-cities-of-egypt-and-the-worship-of-god-spread-among-the-egyptians}}

\bibleverse{18} In that day, there will be five cities in the land of
Egypt that speak the language of Canaan, and swear to Yahweh of Armies.
One will be called ``The city of destruction.'' \bibleverse{19} In that
day, there will be an altar to Yahweh in the middle of the land of
Egypt, and a pillar to Yahweh at its border. \bibleverse{20} It will be
for a sign and for a witness to Yahweh of Armies in the land of Egypt;
for they will cry to Yahweh because of oppressors, and he will send them
a savior and a defender, and he will deliver them. \bibleverse{21}
Yahweh will be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians will know Yahweh in
that day. Yes, they will worship with sacrifice and offering, and will
vow a vow to Yahweh, and will perform it. \bibleverse{22} Yahweh will
strike Egypt, striking and healing. They will return to Yahweh, and he
will be entreated by them, and will heal them.

\hypertarget{assyria-egypt-and-israel-will-form-a-great-world-empire-in-the-service-of-god}{%
\subsection{Assyria, Egypt and Israel will form a great world empire in
the service of
God}\label{assyria-egypt-and-israel-will-form-a-great-world-empire-in-the-service-of-god}}

\bibleverse{23} In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to
Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into
Assyria; and the Egyptians will worship with the Assyrians.
\bibleverse{24} In that day, Israel will be the third with Egypt and
with Assyria, a blessing within the earth; \bibleverse{25} because
Yahweh of Armies has blessed them, saying, ``Blessed be Egypt my people,
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel my inheritance.''

\hypertarget{isaiah-announces-the-captivity-of-egypt-and-ethiopia-by-the-assyrians-through-a-symbolic-act}{%
\subsection{Isaiah announces the captivity of Egypt and Ethiopia by the
Assyrians through a symbolic
act}\label{isaiah-announces-the-captivity-of-egypt-and-ethiopia-by-the-assyrians-through-a-symbolic-act}}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod, when Sargon the
king of Assyria sent him, and he fought against Ashdod and took it;
\bibleverse{2} at that time Yahweh spoke by Isaiah the son of Amoz,
saying, ``Go, and loosen the sackcloth from off your waist, and take
your sandals from off your feet.'' He did so, walking naked and
barefoot. \bibleverse{3} Yahweh said, ``As my servant Isaiah has walked
naked and barefoot three years for a sign and a wonder concerning Egypt
and concerning Ethiopia, \bibleverse{4} so the king of Assyria will lead
away the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old,
naked and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.
\bibleverse{5} They will be dismayed and confounded, because of Ethiopia
their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. \bibleverse{6} The
inhabitants of this coast land will say in that day, `Behold, this is
our expectation, where we fled for help to be delivered from the king of
Assyria. And we, how will we escape?'\,''

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-terrible-vision}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the terrible
vision}\label{announcement-of-the-terrible-vision}}

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of the wilderness of the sea. As whirlwinds in
the South sweep through, it comes from the wilderness, from an awesome
land. \bibleverse{2} A grievous vision is declared to me. The
treacherous man deals treacherously, and the destroyer destroys. Go up,
Elam; attack! I have stopped all of Media's sighing. \bibleverse{3}
Therefore my thighs are filled with anguish. Pains have seized me, like
the pains of a woman in labor. I am in so much pain that I can't hear. I
am so dismayed that I can't see. \bibleverse{4} My heart flutters.
Horror has frightened me. The twilight that I desired has been turned
into trembling for me.

\hypertarget{vision-description}{%
\subsection{Vision Description}\label{vision-description}}

\bibleverse{5} They prepare the table. They set the watch. They eat.
They drink. Rise up, you princes, oil the shield! \bibleverse{6} For the
Lord said to me, ``Go, set a watchman. Let him declare what he sees.
\bibleverse{7} When he sees a troop, horsemen in pairs, a troop of
donkeys, a troop of camels, he shall listen diligently with great
attentiveness.'' \bibleverse{8} He cried like a lion: ``Lord, I stand
continually on the watchtower in the daytime, and every night I stay at
my post. \bibleverse{9} Behold, here comes a troop of men, horsemen in
pairs.'' He answered, ``Fallen, fallen is Babylon; and all the engraved
images of her gods are broken to the ground.

\hypertarget{call-of-the-prophet-to-his-suffering-people}{%
\subsection{Call of the prophet to his suffering
people}\label{call-of-the-prophet-to-his-suffering-people}}

\bibleverse{10} You are my threshing, and the grain of my floor!'' That
which I have heard from Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, I have
declared to you.

\hypertarget{word-of-god-on-duma-and-arabia}{%
\subsection{Word of God on Duma and
Arabia}\label{word-of-god-on-duma-and-arabia}}

\bibleverse{11} The burden of Dumah. One calls to me out of Seir,
``Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?''
\bibleverse{12} The watchman said, ``The morning comes, and also the
night. If you will inquire, inquire. Come back again.'' \bibleverse{13}
The burden on Arabia. You will lodge in the thickets in Arabia, you
caravans of Dedanites. \bibleverse{14} They brought water to him who was
thirsty. The inhabitants of the land of Tema met the fugitives with
their bread. \bibleverse{15} For they fled away from the swords, from
the drawn sword, from the bent bow, and from the heat of battle.
\bibleverse{16} For the Lord said to me, ``Within a year, as a worker
bound by contract would count it, all the glory of Kedar will fail,
\bibleverse{17} and the residue of the number of the archers, the mighty
men of the children of Kedar, will be few; for Yahweh, the God of
Israel, has spoken it.''

\hypertarget{punishment-speech-against-jerusalem-joyously-excited-alienated-from-god-and-unrepentant}{%
\subsection{Punishment speech against Jerusalem joyously excited,
alienated from God and
unrepentant}\label{punishment-speech-against-jerusalem-joyously-excited-alienated-from-god-and-unrepentant}}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of the valley of vision. What ails you now,
that you have all gone up to the housetops? \bibleverse{2} You that are
full of shouting, a tumultuous city, a joyous town, your slain are not
slain with the sword, neither are they dead in battle. \bibleverse{3}
All your rulers fled away together. They were bound by the archers. All
who were found by you were bound together. They fled far away.
\bibleverse{4} Therefore I said, ``Look away from me. I will weep
bitterly. Don't labor to comfort me for the destruction of the daughter
of my people. \bibleverse{5} For it is a day of confusion, and of
treading down, and of perplexity from the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, in the
valley of vision, a breaking down of the walls, and a crying to the
mountains.'' \bibleverse{6} Elam carried his quiver, with chariots of
men and horsemen; and Kir uncovered the shield. \bibleverse{7} Your
choicest valleys were full of chariots, and the horsemen set themselves
in array at the gate. \bibleverse{8} He took away the covering of Judah;
and you looked in that day to the armor in the house of the forest.
\bibleverse{9} You saw the breaches of David's city, that they were
many; and you gathered together the waters of the lower pool.
\bibleverse{10} You counted the houses of Jerusalem, and you broke down
the houses to fortify the wall. \bibleverse{11} You also made a
reservoir between the two walls for the water of the old pool. But you
didn't look to him who had done this, neither did you have respect for
him who planned it long ago. \bibleverse{12} In that day, the Lord,
Yahweh of Armies, called to weeping, to mourning, to baldness, and to
dressing in sackcloth; \bibleverse{13} and behold, there is joy and
gladness, killing cattle and killing sheep, eating meat and drinking
wine: ``Let's eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die.'' \bibleverse{14}
Yahweh of Armies revealed himself in my ears, ``Surely this iniquity
will not be forgiven you until you die,'' says the Lord, Yahweh of
Armies.

\hypertarget{against-the-presumption-of-the-palace-ruler-sebna}{%
\subsection{Against the presumption of the palace ruler
Sebna}\label{against-the-presumption-of-the-palace-ruler-sebna}}

\bibleverse{15} The Lord, Yahweh of Armies says, ``Go, get yourself to
this treasurer, even to Shebna, who is over the house, and say,
\bibleverse{16} `What are you doing here? Who has you here, that you
have dug out a tomb here?' Cutting himself out a tomb on high, chiseling
a habitation for himself in the rock!'' \bibleverse{17} Behold, Yahweh
will overcome you and hurl you away violently. Yes, he will grasp you
firmly. \bibleverse{18} He will surely wind you around and around, and
throw you like a ball into a large country. There you will die, and
there the chariots of your glory will be, you disgrace of your lord's
house. \bibleverse{19} I will thrust you from your office. You will be
pulled down from your station.

\hypertarget{prophecy-and-warning-for-elchakim-shebnas-successor-in-office}{%
\subsection{Prophecy and warning for Elchakim, Shebna's successor in
office}\label{prophecy-and-warning-for-elchakim-shebnas-successor-in-office}}

\bibleverse{20} It will happen in that day that I will call my servant
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, \bibleverse{21} and I will clothe him with
your robe, and strengthen him with your belt. I will commit your
government into his hand; and he will be a father to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. \bibleverse{22} I will lay the key
of David's house on his shoulder. He will open, and no one will shut. He
will shut, and no one will open. \bibleverse{23} I will fasten him like
a nail in a sure place. He will be for a throne of glory to his father's
house. \bibleverse{24} They will hang on him all the glory of his
father's house, the offspring and the issue, every small vessel, from
the cups even to all the pitchers. \bibleverse{25} ``In that day,'' says
Yahweh of Armies, ``the nail that was fastened in a sure place will give
way. It will be cut down and fall. The burden that was on it will be cut
off, for Yahweh has spoken it.''

\hypertarget{lament-for-the-destruction-of-the-country-and-the-city}{%
\subsection{Lament for the destruction of the country and the
city}\label{lament-for-the-destruction-of-the-country-and-the-city}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} The burden of Tyre. Howl, you ships of Tarshish! For it
is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in. From the land
of Kittim it is revealed to them. \bibleverse{2} Be still, you
inhabitants of the coast, you whom the merchants of Sidon that pass over
the sea have replenished. \bibleverse{3} On great waters, the seed of
the Shihor, the harvest of the Nile, was her revenue. She was the market
of nations. \bibleverse{4} Be ashamed, Sidon; for the sea has spoken,
the stronghold of the sea, saying, ``I have not travailed, nor given
birth, neither have I nourished young men, nor brought up virgins.''
\bibleverse{5} When the report comes to Egypt, they will be in anguish
at the report of Tyre. \bibleverse{6} Pass over to Tarshish! Wail, you
inhabitants of the coast! \bibleverse{7} Is this your joyous city, whose
antiquity is of ancient days, whose feet carried her far away to travel?
\bibleverse{8} Who has planned this against Tyre, the giver of crowns,
whose merchants are princes, whose traders are the honorable of the
earth? \bibleverse{9} Yahweh of Armies has planned it, to stain the
pride of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honorable of the
earth. \bibleverse{10} Pass through your land like the Nile, daughter of
Tarshish. There is no restraint any more. \bibleverse{11} He has
stretched out his hand over the sea. He has shaken the kingdoms. Yahweh
has ordered the destruction of Canaan's strongholds. \bibleverse{12} He
said, ``You shall rejoice no more, you oppressed virgin daughter of
Sidon. Arise, pass over to Kittim. Even there you will have no rest.''
\bibleverse{13} Behold, the land of the Chaldeans. This people didn't
exist. The Assyrians founded it for those who dwell in the wilderness.
They set up their towers. They overthrew its palaces. They made it a
ruin. \bibleverse{14} Howl, you ships of Tarshish, for your stronghold
is laid waste!

\hypertarget{the-city-will-flourish-again-later-and-serve-the-lord}{%
\subsection{The city will flourish again later and serve the
Lord}\label{the-city-will-flourish-again-later-and-serve-the-lord}}

\bibleverse{15} It will come to pass in that day that Tyre will be
forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king. After the
end of seventy years it will be to Tyre like in the song of the
prostitute. \bibleverse{16} Take a harp; go about the city, you
prostitute that has been forgotten. Make sweet melody. Sing many songs,
that you may be remembered. \bibleverse{17} It will happen after the end
of seventy years that Yahweh will visit Tyre. She will return to her
wages, and will play the prostitute with all the kingdoms of the world
on the surface of the earth. \bibleverse{18} Her merchandise and her
wages will be holiness to Yahweh. It will not be treasured nor laid up;
for her merchandise will be for those who dwell before Yahweh, to eat
sufficiently, and for durable clothing.

\hypertarget{the-earth-and-its-people-face-a-desolate-judgment}{%
\subsection{The earth and its people face a desolate
judgment}\label{the-earth-and-its-people-face-a-desolate-judgment}}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Behold, Yahweh makes the earth empty, makes it waste,
turns it upside down, and scatters its inhabitants. \bibleverse{2} It
will be as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so
with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the
buyer, so with the seller; as with the creditor, so with the debtor; as
with the taker of interest, so with the giver of interest.
\bibleverse{3} The earth will be utterly emptied and utterly laid waste;
for Yahweh has spoken this word.

\hypertarget{desolate-and-joyless-the-earth-lies-under-the-curse-of-sin}{%
\subsection{Desolate and joyless, the earth lies under the curse of
sin}\label{desolate-and-joyless-the-earth-lies-under-the-curse-of-sin}}

\bibleverse{4} The earth mourns and fades away. The world languishes and
fades away. The lofty people of the earth languish. \bibleverse{5} The
earth also is polluted under its inhabitants, because they have
transgressed the laws, violated the statutes, and broken the everlasting
covenant. \bibleverse{6} Therefore the curse has devoured the earth, and
those who dwell therein are found guilty. Therefore the inhabitants of
the earth are burned, and few men are left. \bibleverse{7} The new wine
mourns. The vine languishes. All the merry-hearted sigh. \bibleverse{8}
The mirth of tambourines ceases. The sound of those who rejoice ends.
The joy of the harp ceases. \bibleverse{9} They will not drink wine with
a song. Strong drink will be bitter to those who drink it.
\bibleverse{10} The confused city is broken down. Every house is shut
up, that no man may come in. \bibleverse{11} There is a crying in the
streets because of the wine. All joy is darkened. The mirth of the land
is gone. \bibleverse{12} The city is left in desolation, and the gate is
struck with destruction.

\hypertarget{judgment-will-be-merciless-there-is-no-reason-to-celebrate-yet-because-horrible-visits-are-yet-to-come}{%
\subsection{Judgment will be merciless; There is no reason to celebrate
yet, because horrible visits are yet to
come}\label{judgment-will-be-merciless-there-is-no-reason-to-celebrate-yet-because-horrible-visits-are-yet-to-come}}

\bibleverse{13} For it will be so within the earth among the peoples, as
the shaking of an olive tree, as the gleanings when the vintage is done.
\bibleverse{14} These shall lift up their voice. They will shout for the
majesty of Yahweh. They cry aloud from the sea. \bibleverse{15}
Therefore glorify Yahweh in the east, even the name of Yahweh, the God
of Israel, in the islands of the sea! \bibleverse{16} From the uttermost
part of the earth have we heard songs. Glory to the righteous! But I
said, ``I pine away! I pine away! woe is me!'' The treacherous have
dealt treacherously. Yes, the treacherous have dealt very treacherously.
\bibleverse{17} Fear, the pit, and the snare are on you who inhabit the
earth. \bibleverse{18} It will happen that he who flees from the noise
of the fear will fall into the pit; and he who comes up out of the
middle of the pit will be taken in the snare; for the windows on high
are opened, and the foundations of the earth tremble. \bibleverse{19}
The earth is utterly broken. The earth is torn apart. The earth is
shaken violently. \bibleverse{20} The earth will stagger like a drunken
man, and will sway back and forth like a hammock. Its disobedience will
be heavy on it, and it will fall and not rise again.

\hypertarget{only-after-the-heavenly-and-earthly-powers-have-been-punished-will-god-assume-his-reign-on-mount-zion}{%
\subsection{Only after the heavenly and earthly powers have been
punished will God assume his reign on Mount
Zion}\label{only-after-the-heavenly-and-earthly-powers-have-been-punished-will-god-assume-his-reign-on-mount-zion}}

\bibleverse{21} It will happen in that day that Yahweh will punish the
army of the high ones on high, and the kings of the earth on the earth.
\bibleverse{22} They will be gathered together, as prisoners are
gathered in the pit, and will be shut up in the prison; and after many
days they will be visited. \bibleverse{23} Then the moon will be
confounded, and the sun ashamed; for Yahweh of Armies will reign on
Mount Zion and in Jerusalem; and glory will be before his elders.

\hypertarget{israels-song-of-thanksgiving-and-praise-for-the-salvation-experienced-up-to-that-time}{%
\subsection{Israel's song of thanksgiving and praise for the salvation
experienced up to that
time}\label{israels-song-of-thanksgiving-and-praise-for-the-salvation-experienced-up-to-that-time}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh, you are my God. I will exalt you! I will praise
your name, for you have done wonderful things, things planned long ago,
in complete faithfulness and truth. \bibleverse{2} For you have made a
city into a heap, a fortified city into a ruin, a palace of strangers to
be no city. It will never be built. \bibleverse{3} Therefore a strong
people will glorify you. A city of awesome nations will fear you.
\bibleverse{4} For you have been a stronghold to the poor, a stronghold
to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shade from the
heat, when the blast of the dreaded ones is like a storm against the
wall. \bibleverse{5} As the heat in a dry place you will bring down the
noise of strangers; as the heat by the shade of a cloud, the song of the
dreaded ones will be brought low.

\hypertarget{prophecy-of-the-blessed-happiness-of-the-complete-kingdom-of-god}{%
\subsection{Prophecy of the blessed happiness of the complete kingdom of
God}\label{prophecy-of-the-blessed-happiness-of-the-complete-kingdom-of-god}}

\bibleverse{6} In this mountain, Yahweh of Armies will make all peoples
a feast of choice meat,\footnote{\textbf{25:6} literally, fat things} a
feast of choice wines, of choice meat full of marrow, of well refined
choice wines. \bibleverse{7} He will destroy in this mountain the
surface of the covering that covers all peoples, and the veil that is
spread over all nations. \bibleverse{8} He has swallowed up death
forever! The Lord Yahweh will wipe away tears from off all faces. He
will take the reproach of his people away from off all the earth, for
Yahweh has spoken it.

\hypertarget{new-joy-of-the-community-for-the-salvation-and-joy-for-the-humiliation-of-obstinate-enemies-especially-the-moabites}{%
\subsection{New joy of the community for the salvation and joy for the
humiliation of obstinate enemies, especially the
Moabites}\label{new-joy-of-the-community-for-the-salvation-and-joy-for-the-humiliation-of-obstinate-enemies-especially-the-moabites}}

\bibleverse{9} It shall be said in that day, ``Behold, this is our God!
We have waited for him, and he will save us! This is Yahweh! We have
waited for him. We will be glad and rejoice in his salvation!''
\bibleverse{10} For Yahweh's hand will rest in this mountain. Moab will
be trodden down in his place, even like straw is trodden down in the
water of the dunghill. \bibleverse{11} He will spread out his hands in
the middle of it, like one who swims spreads out hands to swim, but his
pride will be humbled together with the craft of his hands.
\bibleverse{12} He has brought the high fortress of your walls down,
laid low, and brought to the ground, even to the dust.

\hypertarget{song-of-praise-of-the-city-of-god-firm-and-faithful-to-divine-justice}{%
\subsection{Song of praise of the city of God firm and faithful to
divine
justice}\label{song-of-praise-of-the-city-of-god-firm-and-faithful-to-divine-justice}}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} In that day, this song will be sung in the land of Judah:
``We have a strong city. God appoints salvation for walls and bulwarks.
\bibleverse{2} Open the gates, that the righteous nation may enter: the
one which keeps faith. \bibleverse{3} You will keep whoever's mind is
steadfast in perfect peace, because he trusts in you. \bibleverse{4}
Trust in Yahweh forever; for in Yah, Yahweh, is an everlasting Rock.
\bibleverse{5} For he has brought down those who dwell on high, the
lofty city. He lays it low. He lays it low even to the ground. He brings
it even to the dust. \bibleverse{6} The foot shall tread it down, even
the feet of the poor and the steps of the needy.''

\hypertarget{praise-gods-ways-and-give-thanks-for-gods-painful-but-healing-judgments}{%
\subsection{Praise God's ways and give thanks for God's painful but
healing
judgments}\label{praise-gods-ways-and-give-thanks-for-gods-painful-but-healing-judgments}}

\bibleverse{7} The way of the just is uprightness. You who are upright
make the path of the righteous level. \bibleverse{8} Yes, in the way of
your judgments, Yahweh, we have waited for you. Your name and your
renown are the desire of our soul. \bibleverse{9} With my soul I have
desired you in the night. Yes, with my spirit within me I will seek you
earnestly; for when your judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of
the world learn righteousness. \bibleverse{10} Let favor be shown to the
wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness. In the land of uprightness
he will deal wrongfully, and will not see Yahweh's majesty.
\bibleverse{11} Yahweh, your hand is lifted up, yet they don't see; but
they will see your zeal for the people and be disappointed. Yes, fire
will consume your adversaries. \bibleverse{12} Yahweh, you will ordain
peace for us, for you have also done all our work for us.

\hypertarget{the-congregation-looks-back-to-the-troubled-past-and-asked-for-the-fulfillment-of-their-last-wishes-especially-through-the-resurrection-of-their-pious-dead}{%
\subsection{The congregation looks back to the troubled past and asked
for the fulfillment of their last wishes, especially through the
resurrection of their pious
dead}\label{the-congregation-looks-back-to-the-troubled-past-and-asked-for-the-fulfillment-of-their-last-wishes-especially-through-the-resurrection-of-their-pious-dead}}

\bibleverse{13} Yahweh our God, other lords besides you have had
dominion over us, but we will only acknowledge your name.
\bibleverse{14} The dead shall not live. The departed spirits shall not
rise. Therefore you have visited and destroyed them, and caused all
memory of them to perish. \bibleverse{15} You have increased the nation,
O Yahweh. You have increased the nation! You are glorified! You have
enlarged all the borders of the land. \bibleverse{16} Yahweh, in trouble
they have visited you. They poured out a prayer when your chastening was
on them. \bibleverse{17} Just as a woman with child, who draws near the
time of her delivery, is in pain and cries out in her pangs, so we have
been before you, Yahweh. \bibleverse{18} We have been with child. We
have been in pain. We gave birth, it seems, only to wind. We have not
worked any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the
world fallen. \bibleverse{19} Your dead shall live. Their dead bodies
shall arise. Awake and sing, you who dwell in the dust; for your dew is
like the dew of herbs, and the earth will cast out the departed spirits.

\hypertarget{reminder-to-be-patient}{%
\subsection{Reminder to be patient}\label{reminder-to-be-patient}}

\bibleverse{20} Come, my people, enter into your rooms, and shut your
doors behind you. Hide yourself for a little moment, until the
indignation is past. \bibleverse{21} For, behold, Yahweh comes out of
his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. The
earth also will disclose her blood, and will no longer cover her slain.

\hypertarget{annihilation-of-world-powers-gods-love-for-his-people-expressed-in-the-song-of-the-carefully-guarded-vineyard}{%
\subsection{Annihilation of world powers; God's love for his people,
expressed in the song of the carefully guarded
vineyard}\label{annihilation-of-world-powers-gods-love-for-his-people-expressed-in-the-song-of-the-carefully-guarded-vineyard}}

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} In that day, Yahweh with his hard and great and strong
sword will punish leviathan, the fleeing serpent, and leviathan, the
twisted serpent; and he will kill the dragon that is in the sea.
\bibleverse{2} In that day, sing to her, ``A pleasant vineyard!
\bibleverse{3} I, Yahweh, am its keeper. I will water it every moment.
Lest anyone damage it, I will keep it night and day. \bibleverse{4}
Wrath is not in me, but if I should find briers and thorns, I would do
battle! I would march on them and I would burn them together.
\bibleverse{5} Or else let him take hold of my strength, that he may
make peace with me. Let him make peace with me.''

\hypertarget{the-mild-and-wholesome-punishment-of-the-jewish-people-in-opposition-to-the-total-annihilation-of-the-world-powers}{%
\subsection{The mild and wholesome punishment of the Jewish people in
opposition to the total annihilation of the world
powers}\label{the-mild-and-wholesome-punishment-of-the-jewish-people-in-opposition-to-the-total-annihilation-of-the-world-powers}}

\bibleverse{6} In days to come, Jacob will take root. Israel will
blossom and bud. They will fill the surface of the world with fruit.
\bibleverse{7} Has he struck them as he struck those who struck them? Or
are they killed like those who killed them were killed? \bibleverse{8}
In measure, when you send them away, you contend with them. He has
removed them with his rough blast in the day of the east wind.
\bibleverse{9} Therefore by this the iniquity of Jacob will be forgiven,
and this is all the fruit of taking away his sin: that he makes all the
stones of the altar as chalk stones that are beaten in pieces, so that
the Asherah poles and the incense altars shall rise no more.
\bibleverse{10} For the fortified city is solitary, a habitation
deserted and forsaken, like the wilderness. The calf will feed there,
and there he will lie down, and consume its branches. \bibleverse{11}
When its boughs are withered, they will be broken off. The women will
come and set them on fire, for they are a people of no understanding.
Therefore he who made them will not have compassion on them, and he who
formed them will show them no favor.

\hypertarget{the-purification-of-israel-and-the-return-of-the-comrades-from-captivity}{%
\subsection{The purification of Israel and the return of the comrades
from
captivity}\label{the-purification-of-israel-and-the-return-of-the-comrades-from-captivity}}

\bibleverse{12} It will happen in that day that Yahweh will thresh from
the flowing stream of the Euphrates to the brook of Egypt; and you will
be gathered one by one, children of Israel. \bibleverse{13} It will
happen in that day that a great trumpet will be blown; and those who
were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and those who were outcasts
in the land of Egypt, shall come; and they will worship Yahweh in the
holy mountain at Jerusalem.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-fall-of-samaria}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the fall of
Samaria}\label{announcement-of-the-fall-of-samaria}}

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim,
and to the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of
the fertile valley of those who are overcome with wine! \bibleverse{2}
Behold, the Lord has one who is mighty and strong. Like a storm of hail,
a destroying storm, and like a storm of mighty waters overflowing, he
will cast them down to the earth with his hand. \bibleverse{3} The crown
of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim will be trodden under foot.
\bibleverse{4} The fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the
head of the fertile valley, shall be like the first-ripe fig before the
summer, which someone picks and eats as soon as he sees it.

\hypertarget{this-visitation-will-serve-the-glory-of-god-and-the-renewal-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{This visitation will serve the glory of God and the renewal
of the
people}\label{this-visitation-will-serve-the-glory-of-god-and-the-renewal-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{5} In that day, Yahweh of Armies will become a crown of
glory and a diadem of beauty to the residue of his people,
\bibleverse{6} and a spirit of justice to him who sits in judgment, and
strength to those who turn back the battle at the gate.

\hypertarget{correcting-and-threatening-drunken-priests-and-prophets-hostile-to-the-prophet}{%
\subsection{Correcting and threatening drunken priests and prophets
hostile to the
prophet}\label{correcting-and-threatening-drunken-priests-and-prophets-hostile-to-the-prophet}}

\bibleverse{7} They also reel with wine, and stagger with strong drink.
The priest and the prophet reel with strong drink. They are swallowed up
by wine. They stagger with strong drink. They err in vision. They
stumble in judgment. \bibleverse{8} For all tables are completely full
of filthy vomit and filthiness. \bibleverse{9} Whom will he teach
knowledge? To whom will he explain the message? Those who are weaned
from the milk, and drawn from the breasts? \bibleverse{10} For it is
precept on precept, precept on precept; line on line, line on line; here
a little, there a little. \bibleverse{11} But he will speak to this
nation with stammering lips and in another language, \bibleverse{12} to
whom he said, ``This is the resting place. Give rest to the weary,'' and
``This is the refreshing;'' yet they would not hear. \bibleverse{13}
Therefore Yahweh's word will be to them precept on precept, precept on
precept; line on line, line on line; here a little, there a little; that
they may go, fall backward, be broken, be snared, and be taken.

\hypertarget{condemn-and-threaten-unsuspecting-state-leaders}{%
\subsection{Condemn and threaten unsuspecting state
leaders}\label{condemn-and-threaten-unsuspecting-state-leaders}}

\bibleverse{14} Therefore hear Yahweh's word, you scoffers, that rule
this people in Jerusalem: \bibleverse{15} ``Because you have said, `We
have made a covenant with death, and we are in agreement with
Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{28:15} Sheol is the place of the dead.} When the
overflowing scourge passes through, it won't come to us; for we have
made lies our refuge, and we have hidden ourselves under falsehood.'\,''
\bibleverse{16} Therefore the Lord Yahweh says, ``Behold, I lay in Zion
for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone of a
sure foundation. He who believes shall not act hastily. \bibleverse{17}
I will make justice the measuring line, and righteousness the plumb
line. The hail will sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters will
overflow the hiding place. \bibleverse{18} Your covenant with death
shall be annulled, and your agreement with Sheol\footnote{\textbf{28:18}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} shall not stand. When the overflowing
scourge passes through, then you will be trampled down by it.
\bibleverse{19} As often as it passes through, it will seize you; for
morning by morning it will pass through, by day and by night; and it
will be nothing but terror to understand the message.'' \bibleverse{20}
For the bed is too short to stretch out on, and the blanket is too
narrow to wrap oneself in. \bibleverse{21} For Yahweh will rise up as on
Mount Perazim. He will be angry as in the valley of Gibeon; that he may
do his work, his unusual work, and bring to pass his act, his
extraordinary act. \bibleverse{22} Now therefore don't be scoffers, lest
your bonds be made strong; for I have heard a decree of destruction from
the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, on the whole earth.

\hypertarget{the-wise-behavior-of-god-in-his-educational-work-on-the-people-despite-all-the-changes-is-illustrated-by-a-parable-of-the-farmer}{%
\subsection{The wise behavior of God in his educational work on the
people despite all the changes is illustrated by a parable (of the
farmer)}\label{the-wise-behavior-of-god-in-his-educational-work-on-the-people-despite-all-the-changes-is-illustrated-by-a-parable-of-the-farmer}}

\bibleverse{23} Give ear, and hear my voice! Listen, and hear my speech!
\bibleverse{24} Does he who plows to sow plow continually? Does he keep
turning the soil and breaking the clods? \bibleverse{25} When he has
leveled its surface, doesn't he plant the dill, and scatter the cumin
seed, and put in the wheat in rows, the barley in the appointed place,
and the spelt in its place? \bibleverse{26} For his God instructs him in
right judgment and teaches him. \bibleverse{27} For the dill isn't
threshed with a sharp instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned over
the cumin; but the dill is beaten out with a stick, and the cumin with a
rod. \bibleverse{28} Bread flour must be ground; so he will not always
be threshing it. Although he drives the wheel of his threshing cart over
it, his horses don't grind it. \bibleverse{29} This also comes out from
Yahweh of Armies, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in wisdom.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-siege-humiliation-and-wonderful-salvation-of-jerusalem-the-ariel}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the siege, humiliation and wonderful
salvation of Jerusalem, the
Ariel}\label{announcement-of-the-siege-humiliation-and-wonderful-salvation-of-jerusalem-the-ariel}}

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{29}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to Ariel! Ariel, the city where David encamped! Add
year to year; let the feasts come around; \bibleverse{2} then I will
distress Ariel, and there will be mourning and lamentation. She shall be
to me as an altar hearth.\footnote{\textbf{29:2} or, Ariel}
\bibleverse{3} I will encamp against you all around you, and will lay
siege against you with posted troops. I will raise siege works against
you. \bibleverse{4} You will be brought down, and will speak out of the
ground. Your speech will mumble out of the dust. Your voice will be as
of one who has a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and your speech
will whisper out of the dust. \bibleverse{5} But the multitude of your
foes will be like fine dust, and the multitude of the ruthless ones like
chaff that blows away. Yes, it will be in an instant, suddenly.
\bibleverse{6} She will be visited by Yahweh of Armies with thunder,
with earthquake, with great noise, with whirlwind and storm, and with
the flame of a devouring fire. \bibleverse{7} The multitude of all the
nations that fight against Ariel, even all who fight against her and her
stronghold, and who distress her, will be like a dream, a vision of the
night. \bibleverse{8} It will be like when a hungry man dreams, and
behold, he eats; but he awakes, and his hunger isn't satisfied; or like
when a thirsty man dreams, and behold, he drinks; but he awakes, and
behold, he is faint, and he is still thirsty. The multitude of all the
nations that fight against Mount Zion will be like that.

\hypertarget{the-deep-blindness-of-the-people-gods-work}{%
\subsection{The deep blindness of the people God's
work}\label{the-deep-blindness-of-the-people-gods-work}}

\bibleverse{9} Pause and wonder! Blind yourselves and be blind! They are
drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.
\bibleverse{10} For Yahweh has poured out on you a spirit of deep sleep,
and has closed your eyes, the prophets; and he has covered your heads,
the seers. \bibleverse{11} All vision has become to you like the words
of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one who is educated,
saying, ``Read this, please;'' and he says, ``I can't, for it is
sealed;'' \bibleverse{12} and the book is delivered to one who is not
educated, saying, ``Read this, please;'' and he says, ``I can't read.''

\hypertarget{outward-piety-of-people-necessitates-special-measures-from-god}{%
\subsection{Outward piety of people necessitates special measures from
God}\label{outward-piety-of-people-necessitates-special-measures-from-god}}

\bibleverse{13} The Lord said, ``Because this people draws near with
their mouth and honors me with their lips, but they have removed their
heart far from me, and their fear of me is a commandment of men which
has been taught; \bibleverse{14} therefore, behold, I will proceed to do
a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder;
and the wisdom of their wise men will perish, and the understanding of
their prudent men will be hidden.''

\hypertarget{woe-to-the-idiosyncratic-political-government-of-judah}{%
\subsection{Woe to the idiosyncratic (political) government of
Judah}\label{woe-to-the-idiosyncratic-political-government-of-judah}}

\bibleverse{15} Woe to those who deeply hide their counsel from Yahweh,
and whose deeds are in the dark, and who say, ``Who sees us?'' and ``Who
knows us?'' \bibleverse{16} You turn things upside down! Should the
potter be thought to be like clay, that the thing made should say about
him who made it, ``He didn't make me;'' or the thing formed say of him
who formed it, ``He has no understanding?''

\hypertarget{the-comforting-turn-of-things-in-the-future}{%
\subsection{The comforting turn of things in the
future}\label{the-comforting-turn-of-things-in-the-future}}

\bibleverse{17} Isn't it yet a very little while, and Lebanon will be
turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field will be regarded as
a forest? \bibleverse{18} In that day, the deaf will hear the words of
the book, and the eyes of the blind will see out of obscurity and out of
darkness. \bibleverse{19} The humble also will increase their joy in
Yahweh, and the poor among men will rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.
\bibleverse{20} For the ruthless is brought to nothing, and the scoffer
ceases, and all those who are alert to do evil are cut off---
\bibleverse{21} who cause a person to be indicted by a word, and lay a
snare for one who reproves in the gate, and who deprive the innocent of
justice with false testimony. \bibleverse{22} Therefore Yahweh, who
redeemed Abraham, says concerning the house of Jacob: ``Jacob shall no
longer be ashamed, neither shall his face grow pale. \bibleverse{23} But
when he sees his children, the work of my hands, in the middle of him,
they will sanctify my name. Yes, they will sanctify the Holy One of
Jacob, and will stand in awe of the God of Israel. \bibleverse{24} They
also who err in spirit will come to understanding, and those who grumble
will receive instruction.''

\hypertarget{woe-to-the-wicked-and-useless-who-seek-help-in-egypt}{%
\subsection{Woe to the wicked and useless who seek help in
Egypt}\label{woe-to-the-wicked-and-useless-who-seek-help-in-egypt}}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{30}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Woe to the rebellious children'', says Yahweh, ``who
take counsel, but not from me; and who make an alliance, but not with my
Spirit, that they may add sin to sin; \bibleverse{2} who set out to go
down into Egypt without asking for my advice, to strengthen themselves
in the strength of Pharaoh, and to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt!
\bibleverse{3} Therefore the strength of Pharaoh will be your shame, and
the refuge in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. \bibleverse{4} For
their princes are at Zoan, and their ambassadors have come to Hanes.
\bibleverse{5} They shall all be ashamed because of a people that can't
profit them, that are not a help nor profit, but a shame, and also a
reproach.''

\hypertarget{dismissing-saying-about-egypts-political-importance}{%
\subsection{Dismissing saying about Egypt's political
importance}\label{dismissing-saying-about-egypts-political-importance}}

\bibleverse{6} The burden of the animals of the South. Through the land
of trouble and anguish, of the lioness and the lion, the viper and fiery
flying serpent, they carry their riches on the shoulders of young
donkeys, and their treasures on the humps of camels, to an unprofitable
people. \bibleverse{7} For Egypt helps in vain, and to no purpose;
therefore I have called her Rahab who sits still.

\hypertarget{isaiah-is-supposed-to-write-down-his-prophecies-as-a-testimony-to-the-terrible-future-of-the-unwilling-people}{%
\subsection{Isaiah is supposed to write down his prophecies as a
testimony to the terrible future of the unwilling
people}\label{isaiah-is-supposed-to-write-down-his-prophecies-as-a-testimony-to-the-terrible-future-of-the-unwilling-people}}

\bibleverse{8} Now go, write it before them on a tablet, and inscribe it
in a book, that it may be for the time to come forever and ever.
\bibleverse{9} For it is a rebellious people, lying children, children
who will not hear Yahweh's law; \bibleverse{10} who tell the seers,
``Don't see!'' and the prophets, ``Don't prophesy to us right things.
Tell us pleasant things. Prophesy deceits. \bibleverse{11} Get out of
the way. Turn away from the path. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease
from before us.'' \bibleverse{12} Therefore the Holy One of Israel says,
``Because you despise this word, and trust in oppression and
perverseness, and rely on it, \bibleverse{13} therefore this iniquity
shall be to you like a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high
wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in an instant. \bibleverse{14} He
will break it as a potter's vessel is broken, breaking it in pieces
without sparing, so that there won't be found among the broken pieces a
piece good enough to take fire from the hearth, or to dip up water out
of the cistern.''

\hypertarget{your-strength-is-in-standing-still-and-trusting}{%
\subsection{Your strength is in standing still and
trusting}\label{your-strength-is-in-standing-still-and-trusting}}

\bibleverse{15} For thus said the Lord Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel,
``You will be saved in returning and rest. Your strength will be in
quietness and in confidence.'' You refused, \bibleverse{16} but you
said, ``No, for we will flee on horses;'' therefore you will flee; and,
``We will ride on the swift;'' therefore those who pursue you will be
swift. \bibleverse{17} One thousand will flee at the threat of one. At
the threat of five, you will flee until you are left like a beacon on
the top of a mountain, and like a banner on a hill. \bibleverse{18}
Therefore Yahweh will wait, that he may be gracious to you; and
therefore he will be exalted, that he may have mercy on you, for Yahweh
is a God of justice. Blessed are all those who wait for him.

\hypertarget{the-future-renewal-and-happiness-of-the-faithful}{%
\subsection{The future renewal and happiness of the
faithful}\label{the-future-renewal-and-happiness-of-the-faithful}}

\bibleverse{19} For the people will dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. You will
weep no more. He will surely be gracious to you at the voice of your
cry. When he hears you, he will answer you. \bibleverse{20} Though the
Lord may give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction,
yet your teachers won't be hidden any more, but your eyes will see your
teachers; \bibleverse{21} and when you turn to the right hand, and when
you turn to the left, your ears will hear a voice behind you, saying,
``This is the way. Walk in it.'' \bibleverse{22} You shall defile the
overlaying of your engraved images of silver, and the plating of your
molten images of gold. You shall cast them away as an unclean thing. You
shall tell it, ``Go away!'' \bibleverse{23} He will give the rain for
your seed, with which you will sow the ground; and bread of the increase
of the ground will be rich and plentiful. In that day, your livestock
will feed in large pastures. \bibleverse{24} The oxen likewise and the
young donkeys that till the ground will eat savory feed, which has been
winnowed with the shovel and with the fork. \bibleverse{25} There will
be brooks and streams of water on every lofty mountain and on every high
hill in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.
\bibleverse{26} Moreover the light of the moon will be like the light of
the sun, and the light of the sun will be seven times brighter, like the
light of seven days, in the day that Yahweh binds up the fracture of his
people, and heals the wound they were struck with.

\hypertarget{gods-personal-appearance-to-destroy-the-enemy-especially-the-assyrians}{%
\subsection{God's personal appearance to destroy the enemy, especially
the
Assyrians}\label{gods-personal-appearance-to-destroy-the-enemy-especially-the-assyrians}}

\bibleverse{27} Behold, Yahweh's name comes from far away, burning with
his anger, and in thick rising smoke. His lips are full of indignation.
His tongue is as a devouring fire. \bibleverse{28} His breath is as an
overflowing stream that reaches even to the neck, to sift the nations
with the sieve of destruction. A bridle that leads to ruin will be in
the jaws of the peoples. \bibleverse{29} You will have a song, as in the
night when a holy feast is kept, and gladness of heart, as when one goes
with a flute to come to Yahweh's mountain, to Israel's Rock.
\bibleverse{30} Yahweh will cause his glorious voice to be heard, and
will show the descent of his arm, with the indignation of his anger and
the flame of a devouring fire, with a blast, storm, and hailstones.
\bibleverse{31} For through Yahweh's voice the Assyrian will be
dismayed. He will strike him with his rod. \bibleverse{32} Every stroke
of the rod of punishment, which Yahweh will lay on him, will be with the
sound of tambourines and harps. He will fight with them in battles,
brandishing weapons. \bibleverse{33} For his burning place has long been
ready. Yes, it is prepared for the king. He has made its pyre deep and
large with fire and much wood. Yahweh's breath, like a stream of sulfur,
kindles it.

\hypertarget{egypt-cannot-protect-those-whose-impiety-the-eternal-must-punish}{%
\subsection{Egypt cannot protect those whose impiety the Eternal must
punish}\label{egypt-cannot-protect-those-whose-impiety-the-eternal-must-punish}}

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{31}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to those who go down to Egypt for help, and rely on
horses, and trust in chariots because they are many, and in horsemen
because they are very strong, but they don't look to the Holy One of
Israel, and they don't seek Yahweh! \bibleverse{2} Yet he also is wise,
and will bring disaster, and will not call back his words, but will
arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of those
who work iniquity. \bibleverse{3} Now the Egyptians are men, and not
God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When Yahweh stretches out
his hand, both he who helps shall stumble, and he who is helped shall
fall, and they all shall be consumed together.

\hypertarget{the-lord-wants-to-save-his-city-for-the-godly-and-destroy-assyria}{%
\subsection{The Lord wants to save his city for the godly and destroy
Assyria}\label{the-lord-wants-to-save-his-city-for-the-godly-and-destroy-assyria}}

\bibleverse{4} For Yahweh says to me, ``As the lion and the young lion
growling over his prey, if a multitude of shepherds is called together
against him, will not be dismayed at their voice, nor abase himself for
their noise, so Yahweh of Armies will come down to fight on Mount Zion
and on its heights. \bibleverse{5} As birds hovering, so Yahweh of
Armies will protect Jerusalem. He will protect and deliver it. He will
pass over and preserve it.'' \bibleverse{6} Return to him from whom you
have deeply revolted, children of Israel. \bibleverse{7} For in that day
everyone shall cast away his idols of silver and his idols of gold---sin
which your own hands have made for you. \bibleverse{8} ``The Assyrian
will fall by the sword, not of man; and the sword, not of mankind, shall
devour him. He will flee from the sword, and his young men will become
subject to forced labor. \bibleverse{9} His rock will pass away by
reason of terror, and his princes will be afraid of the banner,'' says
Yahweh, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

\hypertarget{the-wonderfully-renewed-sense-of-the-rulers-and-the-people-through-the-judgment}{%
\subsection{The wonderfully renewed sense of the rulers and the people
through the
judgment}\label{the-wonderfully-renewed-sense-of-the-rulers-and-the-people-through-the-judgment}}

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{32}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes
shall rule in justice. \bibleverse{2} A man shall be as a hiding place
from the wind, and a covert from the storm, as streams of water in a dry
place, as the shade of a large rock in a weary land. \bibleverse{3} The
eyes of those who see will not be dim, and the ears of those who hear
will listen. \bibleverse{4} The heart of the rash will understand
knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers will be ready to speak
plainly. \bibleverse{5} The fool will no longer be called noble, nor the
scoundrel be highly respected. \bibleverse{6} For the fool will speak
folly, and his heart will work iniquity, to practice profanity, and to
utter error against Yahweh, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and to
cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. \bibleverse{7} The ways of the
scoundrel are evil. He devises wicked plans to destroy the humble with
lying words, even when the needy speaks right. \bibleverse{8} But the
noble devises noble things, and he will continue in noble things.

\hypertarget{punitive-and-threatening-speech-to-women-who-live-with-carefree-frivolity}{%
\subsection{Punitive and threatening speech to women who live with
carefree
frivolity}\label{punitive-and-threatening-speech-to-women-who-live-with-carefree-frivolity}}

\bibleverse{9} Rise up, you women who are at ease! Hear my voice! You
careless daughters, give ear to my speech! \bibleverse{10} For days
beyond a year you will be troubled, you careless women; for the vintage
will fail. The harvest won't come. \bibleverse{11} Tremble, you women
who are at ease! Be troubled, you careless ones! Strip yourselves, make
yourselves naked, and put sackcloth on your waist. \bibleverse{12} Beat
your breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.
\bibleverse{13} Thorns and briers will come up on my people's land; yes,
on all the houses of joy in the joyous city. \bibleverse{14} For the
palace will be forsaken. The populous city will be deserted. The hill
and the watchtower will be for dens forever, a delight for wild donkeys,
a pasture of flocks,

\hypertarget{promise-of-salvation-for-people-who-have-finally-been-purified-after-the-outpouring-of-the-spirit}{%
\subsection{Promise of salvation for people who have finally been
purified after the outpouring of the
spirit}\label{promise-of-salvation-for-people-who-have-finally-been-purified-after-the-outpouring-of-the-spirit}}

\bibleverse{15} until the Spirit is poured on us from on high, and the
wilderness becomes a fruitful field, and the fruitful field is
considered a forest. \bibleverse{16} Then justice will dwell in the
wilderness; and righteousness will remain in the fruitful field.
\bibleverse{17} The work of righteousness will be peace, and the effect
of righteousness, quietness and confidence forever. \bibleverse{18} My
people will live in a peaceful habitation, in safe dwellings, and in
quiet resting places, \bibleverse{19} though hail flattens the forest,
and the city is leveled completely. \bibleverse{20} Blessed are you who
sow beside all waters, who send out the feet of the ox and the donkey.

\hypertarget{the-final-call-of-affliction-and-anguish-for-the-infamous-conqueror-for-whom-gods-judgment-has-now-come}{%
\subsection{The final call of affliction and anguish for the infamous
conqueror for whom God's judgment has now
come}\label{the-final-call-of-affliction-and-anguish-for-the-infamous-conqueror-for-whom-gods-judgment-has-now-come}}

\hypertarget{section-32}{%
\section{33}\label{section-32}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to you who destroy, but you weren't destroyed, and
who betray, but nobody betrayed you! When you have finished destroying,
you will be destroyed; and when you have finished betrayal, you will be
betrayed. \bibleverse{2} Yahweh, be gracious to us. We have waited for
you. Be our strength every morning, our salvation also in the time of
trouble. \bibleverse{3} At the noise of the thunder, the peoples have
fled. When you lift yourself up, the nations are scattered.
\bibleverse{4} Your plunder will be gathered as the caterpillar gathers.
Men will leap on it as locusts leap. \bibleverse{5} Yahweh is exalted,
for he dwells on high. He has filled Zion with justice and
righteousness. \bibleverse{6} There will be stability in your times,
abundance of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge. The fear of Yahweh is
your treasure. \bibleverse{7} Behold, their valiant ones cry outside;
the ambassadors of peace weep bitterly. \bibleverse{8} The highways are
desolate. The traveling man ceases. The covenant is broken. He has
despised the cities. He doesn't respect man. \bibleverse{9} The land
mourns and languishes. Lebanon is confounded and withers away. Sharon is
like a desert, and Bashan and Carmel are stripped bare. \bibleverse{10}
``Now I will arise,'' says Yahweh. ``Now I will lift myself up. Now I
will be exalted. \bibleverse{11} You will conceive chaff. You will give
birth to stubble. Your breath is a fire that will devour you.
\bibleverse{12} The peoples will be like the burning of lime, like
thorns that are cut down and burned in the fire. \bibleverse{13} Hear,
you who are far off, what I have done; and, you who are near,
acknowledge my might.''

\hypertarget{the-sanctifying-effect-of-judgment-the-future-happiness-of-the-people-under-divine-protection}{%
\subsection{The sanctifying effect of judgment; the future happiness of
the people under divine
protection}\label{the-sanctifying-effect-of-judgment-the-future-happiness-of-the-people-under-divine-protection}}

\bibleverse{14} The sinners in Zion are afraid. Trembling has seized the
godless ones. Who among us can live with the devouring fire? Who among
us can live with everlasting burning? \bibleverse{15} He who walks
righteously and speaks blamelessly, he who despises the gain of
oppressions, who gestures with his hands, refusing to take a bribe, who
stops his ears from hearing of bloodshed, and shuts his eyes from
looking at evil--- \bibleverse{16} he will dwell on high. His place of
defense will be the fortress of rocks. His bread will be supplied. His
waters will be sure. \bibleverse{17} Your eyes will see the king in his
beauty. They will see a distant land. \bibleverse{18} Your heart will
meditate on the terror. Where is he who counted? Where is he who
weighed? Where is he who counted the towers? \bibleverse{19} You will no
longer see the fierce people, a people of a deep speech that you can't
comprehend, with a strange language that you can't understand.
\bibleverse{20} Look at Zion, the city of our appointed festivals. Your
eyes will see Jerusalem, a quiet habitation, a tent that won't be
removed. Its stakes will never be plucked up, nor will any of its cords
be broken. \bibleverse{21} But there Yahweh will be with us in majesty,
a place of wide rivers and streams, in which no galley with oars will
go, neither will any gallant ship pass by there. \bibleverse{22} For
Yahweh is our judge. Yahweh is our lawgiver. Yahweh is our king. He will
save us. \bibleverse{23} Your rigging is untied. They couldn't
strengthen the foot of their mast. They couldn't spread the sail. Then
the prey of a great plunder was divided. The lame took the prey.
\bibleverse{24} The inhabitant won't say, ``I am sick.'' The people who
dwell therein will be forgiven their iniquity.

\hypertarget{gods-judgment-against-all-foreign-peoples-hostile-to-gods-kingdom-especially-edom}{%
\subsection{God's judgment against all foreign peoples hostile to God's
kingdom, especially
Edom}\label{gods-judgment-against-all-foreign-peoples-hostile-to-gods-kingdom-especially-edom}}

\hypertarget{section-33}{%
\section{34}\label{section-33}}

\bibleverse{1} Come near, you nations, to hear! Listen, you peoples. Let
the earth and all it contains hear, the world, and everything that comes
from it. \bibleverse{2} For Yahweh is enraged against all the nations,
and angry with all their armies. He has utterly destroyed them. He has
given them over for slaughter. \bibleverse{3} Their slain will also be
cast out, and the stench of their dead bodies will come up. The
mountains will melt in their blood. \bibleverse{4} All of the army of
the sky will be dissolved. The sky will be rolled up like a scroll, and
all its armies will fade away, as a leaf fades from off a vine or a fig
tree.

\hypertarget{the-judgment-of-gods-wrath-against-edom-in-revenge-for-zion}{%
\subsection{The judgment of God's wrath against Edom in revenge for
Zion}\label{the-judgment-of-gods-wrath-against-edom-in-revenge-for-zion}}

\bibleverse{5} For my sword has drunk its fill in the sky. Behold, it
will come down on Edom, and on the people of my curse, for judgment.
\bibleverse{6} Yahweh's sword is filled with blood. It is covered with
fat, with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of
rams; for Yahweh has a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the
land of Edom. \bibleverse{7} The wild oxen will come down with them, and
the young bulls with the mighty bulls; and their land will be drunken
with blood, and their dust made greasy with fat. \bibleverse{8} For
Yahweh has a day of vengeance, a year of recompense for the cause of
Zion. \bibleverse{9} Its streams will be turned into pitch, its dust
into sulfur, and its land will become burning pitch. \bibleverse{10} It
won't be quenched night or day. Its smoke will go up forever. From
generation to generation, it will lie waste. No one will pass through it
forever and ever. \bibleverse{11} But the pelican and the porcupine will
possess it. The owl and the raven will dwell in it. He will stretch the
line of confusion over it, and the plumb line of emptiness.
\bibleverse{12} They shall call its nobles to the kingdom, but none
shall be there; and all its princes shall be nothing. \bibleverse{13}
Thorns will come up in its palaces, nettles and thistles in its
fortresses; and it will be a habitation of jackals, a court for
ostriches. \bibleverse{14} The wild animals of the desert will meet with
the wolves, and the wild goat will cry to his fellow. Yes, the night
creature\footnote{\textbf{34:14} literally, lilith, which could also be
  a night demon or night monster} shall settle there, and shall find
herself a place of rest. \bibleverse{15} The arrow snake will make her
nest there, and lay, hatch, and gather under her shade. Yes, the kites
will be gathered there, every one with her mate. \bibleverse{16} Search
in the book of Yahweh, and read: not one of these will be missing. None
will lack her mate. For my mouth has commanded, and his Spirit has
gathered them. \bibleverse{17} He has cast the lot for them, and his
hand has divided it to them with a measuring line. They shall possess it
forever. From generation to generation they will dwell in it.

\hypertarget{the-homecoming-of-the-redeemed-people-and-the-glorious-renewal-of-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{The homecoming of the redeemed people and the glorious
renewal of
Jerusalem}\label{the-homecoming-of-the-redeemed-people-and-the-glorious-renewal-of-jerusalem}}

\hypertarget{section-34}{%
\section{35}\label{section-34}}

\bibleverse{1} The wilderness and the dry land will be glad. The desert
will rejoice and blossom like a rose. \bibleverse{2} It will blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing. Lebanon's glory will
be given to it, the excellence of Carmel and Sharon. They will see
Yahweh's glory, the excellence of our God. \bibleverse{3} Strengthen the
weak hands, and make the feeble knees firm. \bibleverse{4} Tell those
who have a fearful heart, ``Be strong! Don't be afraid! Behold, your God
will come with vengeance, God's retribution. He will come and save you.
\bibleverse{5} Then the eyes of the blind will be opened, and the ears
of the deaf will be unstopped. \bibleverse{6} Then the lame man will
leap like a deer, and the tongue of the mute will sing; for waters will
break out in the wilderness, and streams in the desert. \bibleverse{7}
The burning sand will become a pool, and the thirsty ground springs of
water. Grass with reeds and rushes will be in the habitation of jackals,
where they lay. \bibleverse{8} A highway will be there, a road, and it
will be called ``The Holy Way''. The unclean shall not pass over it, but
it will be for those who walk in the Way. Wicked fools shall not go
there. \bibleverse{9} No lion will be there, nor will any ravenous
animal go up on it. They will not be found there; but the redeemed will
walk there. \bibleverse{10} Then Yahweh's ransomed ones will return, and
come with singing to Zion; and everlasting joy will be on their heads.
They will obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing will flee
away.''

\hypertarget{jerusalem-threatened-by-sennacherib-and-wonderfully-saved}{%
\subsection{Jerusalem threatened by Sennacherib and wonderfully
saved}\label{jerusalem-threatened-by-sennacherib-and-wonderfully-saved}}

\hypertarget{section-35}{%
\section{36}\label{section-35}}

\bibleverse{1} Now in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib
king of Assyria attacked all of the fortified cities of Judah and
captured them. \bibleverse{2} The king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from
Lachish to Jerusalem to King Hezekiah with a large army. He stood by the
aqueduct from the upper pool in the fuller's field highway.
\bibleverse{3} Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph the
recorder came out to him. \bibleverse{4} Rabshakeh said to them, ``Now
tell Hezekiah, `The great king, the king of Assyria, says, ``What
confidence is this in which you trust? \bibleverse{5} I say that your
counsel and strength for the war are only vain words. Now in whom do you
trust, that you have rebelled against me? \bibleverse{6} Behold, you
trust in the staff of this bruised reed, even in Egypt, which if a man
leans on it, it will go into his hand and pierce it. So is Pharaoh king
of Egypt to all who trust in him. \bibleverse{7} But if you tell me, `We
trust in Yahweh our God,' isn't that he whose high places and whose
altars Hezekiah has taken away, and has said to Judah and to Jerusalem,
`You shall worship before this altar?'\,'' \bibleverse{8} Now therefore,
please make a pledge to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give
you two thousand horses, if you are able on your part to set riders on
them. \bibleverse{9} How then can you turn away the face of one captain
of the least of my master's servants, and put your trust in Egypt for
chariots and for horsemen? \bibleverse{10} Have I come up now without
Yahweh against this land to destroy it? Yahweh said to me, ``Go up
against this land, and destroy it.''\,'\,''

\hypertarget{sennacherib-and-the-arrogance-of-his-ambassadors}{%
\subsection{Sennacherib and the arrogance of his
ambassadors}\label{sennacherib-and-the-arrogance-of-his-ambassadors}}

\bibleverse{11} Then Eliakim, Shebna and Joah said to Rabshakeh,
``Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. Don't
speak to us in the Jews' language in the hearing of the people who are
on the wall.'' \bibleverse{12} But Rabshakeh said, ``Has my master sent
me only to your master and to you, to speak these words, and not to the
men who sit on the wall, who will eat their own dung and drink their own
urine with you?'' \bibleverse{13} Then Rabshakeh stood, and called out
with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said, ``Hear the words of
the great king, the king of Assyria! \bibleverse{14} The king says,
`Don't let Hezekiah deceive you; for he will not be able to deliver you.
\bibleverse{15} Don't let Hezekiah make you trust in Yahweh, saying,
``Yahweh will surely deliver us. This city won't be given into the hand
of the king of Assyria.''\,' \bibleverse{16} Don't listen to Hezekiah,
for the king of Assyria says, `Make your peace with me, and come out to
me; and each of you eat from his vine, and each one from his fig tree,
and each one of you drink the waters of his own cistern; \bibleverse{17}
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of
grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards. \bibleverse{18}
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, ``Yahweh will deliver us.''
Have any of the gods of the nations delivered their lands from the hand
of the king of Assyria? \bibleverse{19} Where are the gods of Hamath and
Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria
from my hand? \bibleverse{20} Who are they among all the gods of these
countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Yahweh
should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'\,'' \bibleverse{21} But they
remained silent, and said nothing in reply, for the king's commandment
was, ``Don't answer him.'' \bibleverse{22} Then Eliakim the son of
Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah,
the son of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn,
and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

\hypertarget{hezekiahs-encouragement-of-isaiah}{%
\subsection{Hezekiah's encouragement of
Isaiah}\label{hezekiahs-encouragement-of-isaiah}}

\hypertarget{section-36}{%
\section{37}\label{section-36}}

\bibleverse{1} When King Hezekiah heard it, he tore his clothes, covered
himself with sackcloth, and went into Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{2} He
sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the
elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet,
the son of Amoz. \bibleverse{3} They said to him, ``Hezekiah says,
`Today is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of rejection; for the
children have come to the birth, and there is no strength to give birth.
\bibleverse{4} It may be Yahweh your God will hear the words of
Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the
living God, and will rebuke the words which Yahweh your God has heard.
Therefore lift up your prayer for the remnant that is left.'\,''
\bibleverse{5} So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
\bibleverse{6} Isaiah said to them, ``Tell your master, `Yahweh says,
``Don't be afraid of the words that you have heard, with which the
servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. \bibleverse{7}
Behold, I will put a spirit in him and he will hear news, and will
return to his own land. I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own
land.''\,'\,''

\hypertarget{sennacheribs-second-request-through-a-threatening-letter-from-libna}{%
\subsection{Sennacherib's second request through a threatening letter
from
Libna}\label{sennacheribs-second-request-through-a-threatening-letter-from-libna}}

\bibleverse{8} So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria
warring against Libnah, for he heard that he had departed from Lachish.
\bibleverse{9} He heard news concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, ``He
has come out to fight against you.'' When he heard it, he sent
messengers to Hezekiah, saying, \bibleverse{10} ``Thus you shall speak
to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, `Don't let your God in whom you trust
deceive you, saying, ``Jerusalem won't be given into the hand of the
king of Assyria.'' \bibleverse{11} Behold, you have heard what the kings
of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. Shall you
be delivered? \bibleverse{12} Have the gods of the nations delivered
them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the
children of Eden who were in Telassar? \bibleverse{13} Where is the king
of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of
Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?'\,''

\hypertarget{hezekiahs-supplication-in-the-temple}{%
\subsection{Hezekiah's supplication in the
temple}\label{hezekiahs-supplication-in-the-temple}}

\bibleverse{14} Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the
messengers and read it. Then Hezekiah went up to Yahweh's house, and
spread it before Yahweh. \bibleverse{15} Hezekiah prayed to Yahweh,
saying, \bibleverse{16} ``Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, who is
enthroned among the cherubim, you are the God, even you alone, of all
the kingdoms of the earth. You have made heaven and earth.
\bibleverse{17} Turn your ear, Yahweh, and hear. Open your eyes, Yahweh,
and behold. Hear all of the words of Sennacherib, who has sent to defy
the living God. \bibleverse{18} Truly, Yahweh, the kings of Assyria have
destroyed all the countries and their land, \bibleverse{19} and have
cast their gods into the fire; for they were no gods, but the work of
men's hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them.
\bibleverse{20} Now therefore, Yahweh our God, save us from his hand,
that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you are Yahweh, even
you only.''

\hypertarget{isaiah-sends-notification-of-his-prayer-to-king-hezekiah-in-the-name-of-god}{%
\subsection{Isaiah sends notification of his prayer to King Hezekiah in
the name of
God}\label{isaiah-sends-notification-of-his-prayer-to-king-hezekiah-in-the-name-of-god}}

\bibleverse{21} Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying,
``Yahweh, the God of Israel says, `Because you have prayed to me against
Sennacherib king of Assyria, \bibleverse{22} this is the word which
Yahweh has spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion has
despised you and ridiculed you. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her
head at you. \bibleverse{23} Whom have you defied and blasphemed?
Against whom have you exalted your voice and lifted up your eyes on
high? Against the Holy One of Israel. \bibleverse{24} By your servants,
you have defied the Lord, and have said, ``With the multitude of my
chariots I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost
parts of Lebanon. I will cut down its tall cedars and its choice cypress
trees. I will enter into its farthest height, the forest of its fruitful
field. \bibleverse{25} I have dug and drunk water, and with the sole of
my feet I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt.'' \bibleverse{26}
``\,`Have you not heard how I have done it long ago, and formed it in
ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that it should be yours to
destroy fortified cities, turning them into ruinous heaps.
\bibleverse{27} Therefore their inhabitants had little power. They were
dismayed and confounded. They were like the grass of the field, and like
the green herb, like the grass on the housetops, and like a field before
its crop has grown. \bibleverse{28} But I know your sitting down, your
going out, your coming in, and your raging against me. \bibleverse{29}
Because of your raging against me, and because your arrogance has come
up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle
in your lips, and I will turn you back by the way by which you came.
\bibleverse{30} ``\,`This shall be the sign to you: You will eat this
year that which grows of itself, and in the second year that which
springs from it; and in the third year sow and reap and plant vineyards,
and eat their fruit. \bibleverse{31} The remnant that is escaped of the
house of Judah will again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
\bibleverse{32} For out of Jerusalem a remnant will go out, and
survivors will escape from Mount Zion. The zeal of Yahweh of Armies will
perform this.' \bibleverse{33} ``Therefore Yahweh says concerning the
king of Assyria, `He will not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow
there, neither will he come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound
against it. \bibleverse{34} He will return the way that he came, and he
won't come to this city,' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{35} `For I will
defend this city to save it, for my own sake, and for my servant David's
sake.'\,''

\hypertarget{fulfillment-of-the-promise-sennacheribs-departure-and-assassination}{%
\subsection{Fulfillment of the promise: Sennacherib's departure and
assassination}\label{fulfillment-of-the-promise-sennacheribs-departure-and-assassination}}

\bibleverse{36} Then Yahweh's angel went out and struck one hundred and
eighty-five thousand men in the camp of the Assyrians. When men arose
early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies.
\bibleverse{37} So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, went away,
returned to Nineveh, and stayed there. \bibleverse{38} As he was
worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, Adrammelech and Sharezer his
sons struck him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of
Ararat. Esar Haddon his son reigned in his place.

\hypertarget{hezekiahs-illness-recovery-and-song-of-praise}{%
\subsection{Hezekiah's Illness, Recovery, and Song of
Praise}\label{hezekiahs-illness-recovery-and-song-of-praise}}

\hypertarget{section-37}{%
\section{38}\label{section-37}}

\bibleverse{1} In those days Hezekiah was sick and near death. Isaiah
the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said to him, ``Yahweh
says, `Set your house in order, for you will die, and not live.'\,''
\bibleverse{2} Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to
Yahweh, \bibleverse{3} and said, ``Remember now, Yahweh, I beg you, how
I have walked before you in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in your sight.'' Then Hezekiah wept bitterly.
\bibleverse{4} Then Yahweh's word came to Isaiah, saying, \bibleverse{5}
``Go, and tell Hezekiah, `Yahweh, the God of David your father, says,
``I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Behold, I will add
fifteen years to your life. \bibleverse{6} I will deliver you and this
city out of the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this
city. \bibleverse{7} This shall be the sign to you from Yahweh, that
Yahweh will do this thing that he has spoken. \bibleverse{8} Behold, I
will cause the shadow on the sundial, which has gone down on the sundial
of Ahaz with the sun, to return backward ten steps.''\,'\,'' So the sun
returned ten steps on the sundial on which it had gone down.

\hypertarget{looking-back-at-the-difficulties}{%
\subsection{Looking back at the
difficulties}\label{looking-back-at-the-difficulties}}

\bibleverse{9} The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been
sick, and had recovered of his sickness: \bibleverse{10} I said, ``In
the middle of my life I go into the gates of Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{38:10}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} I am deprived of the residue of my
years.'' \bibleverse{11} I said, ``I won't see Yah, Yah in the land of
the living. I will see man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
\bibleverse{12} My dwelling is removed, and is carried away from me like
a shepherd's tent. I have rolled up my life like a weaver. He will cut
me off from the loom. From day even to night you will make an end of me.
\bibleverse{13} I waited patiently until morning. He breaks all my bones
like a lion. From day even to night you will make an end of me.
\bibleverse{14} I chattered like a swallow or a crane. I moaned like a
dove. My eyes weaken looking upward. Lord, I am oppressed. Be my
security.''

\hypertarget{expression-of-grateful-joy-graduation}{%
\subsection{Expression of grateful joy;
Graduation}\label{expression-of-grateful-joy-graduation}}

\bibleverse{15} What will I say? He has both spoken to me, and himself
has done it. I will walk carefully all my years because of the anguish
of my soul. \bibleverse{16} Lord, men live by these things; and my
spirit finds life in all of them. You restore me, and cause me to live.
\bibleverse{17} Behold, for peace I had great anguish, but you have in
love for my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption; for you have
cast all my sins behind your back. \bibleverse{18} For Sheol\footnote{\textbf{38:18}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} can't praise you. Death can't
celebrate you. Those who go down into the pit can't hope for your truth.
\bibleverse{19} The living, the living, he shall praise you, as I do
today. The father shall make known your truth to the children.
\bibleverse{20} Yahweh will save me. Therefore we will sing my songs
with stringed instruments all the days of our life in Yahweh's house.
\bibleverse{21} Now Isaiah had said, ``Let them take a cake of figs, and
lay it for a poultice on the boil, and he shall recover.''
\bibleverse{22} Hezekiah also had said, ``What is the sign that I will
go up to Yahweh's house?''

\hypertarget{embassy-of-merodach-baladan-of-babylon-to-hezekiah}{%
\subsection{Embassy of Merodach-Baladan of Babylon to
Hezekiah}\label{embassy-of-merodach-baladan-of-babylon-to-hezekiah}}

\hypertarget{section-38}{%
\section{39}\label{section-38}}

\bibleverse{1} At that time, Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king
of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that he
had been sick, and had recovered. \bibleverse{2} Hezekiah was pleased
with them, and showed them the house of his precious things, the silver,
the gold, the spices, and the precious oil, and all the house of his
armor, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his
house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah didn't show them.

\hypertarget{isaiahs-punishing-speech-about-the-kings-careless-pomp-and-his-prophecy-about-the-babylonian-captivity}{%
\subsection{Isaiah's punishing speech about the king's careless pomp and
his prophecy about the Babylonian
captivity}\label{isaiahs-punishing-speech-about-the-kings-careless-pomp-and-his-prophecy-about-the-babylonian-captivity}}

\bibleverse{3} Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah, and asked
him, ``What did these men say? From where did they come to you?''
Hezekiah said, ``They have come from a country far from me, even from
Babylon.'' \bibleverse{4} Then he asked, ``What have they seen in your
house?'' Hezekiah answered, ``They have seen all that is in my house.
There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.''
\bibleverse{5} Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, ``Hear the word of Yahweh
of Armies: \bibleverse{6} `Behold, the days are coming when all that is
in your house, and that which your fathers have stored up until today,
will be carried to Babylon. Nothing will be left,' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{7} `They will take away your sons who will issue from you,
whom you shall father, and they will be eunuchs in the king of Babylon's
palace.'\,''

\hypertarget{hezekiahs-devoted-but-unrepentant-response}{%
\subsection{Hezekiah's devoted but unrepentant
response}\label{hezekiahs-devoted-but-unrepentant-response}}

\bibleverse{8} Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, ``Yahweh's word which you
have spoken is good.'' He said moreover, ``For there will be peace and
truth in my days.''

\hypertarget{gods-comforting-saying-about-the-peoples-forgiveness}{%
\subsection{God's comforting saying about the people's
forgiveness}\label{gods-comforting-saying-about-the-peoples-forgiveness}}

\hypertarget{section-39}{%
\section{40}\label{section-39}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Comfort, comfort my people,'' says your God.
\bibleverse{2} ``Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and call out to her
that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, that
she has received of Yahweh's hand double for all her sins.''

\hypertarget{prepare-a-way-for-the-lord-through-the-desert}{%
\subsection{Prepare a way for the Lord through the
desert!}\label{prepare-a-way-for-the-lord-through-the-desert}}

\bibleverse{3} The voice of one who calls out, ``Prepare the way of
Yahweh in the wilderness! Make a level highway in the desert for our
God. \bibleverse{4} Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain
and hill shall be made low. The uneven shall be made level, and the
rough places a plain. \bibleverse{5} Yahweh's glory shall be revealed,
and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth of Yahweh has spoken
it.''

\hypertarget{nothing-of-man-but-eternal-existence-of-the-word-of-god}{%
\subsection{Nothing of man, but eternal existence of the word of
God}\label{nothing-of-man-but-eternal-existence-of-the-word-of-god}}

\bibleverse{6} The voice of one saying, ``Cry out!'' One said, ``What
shall I cry?'' ``All flesh is like grass, and all its glory is like the
flower of the field. \bibleverse{7} The grass withers, the flower fades,
because Yahweh's breath blows on it. Surely the people are like grass.
\bibleverse{8} The grass withers, the flower fades; but the word of our
God stands forever.''

\hypertarget{zions-victory-song-almighty-and-faithful-god-is-here}{%
\subsection{Zion's Victory Song: Almighty and Faithful God is
Here}\label{zions-victory-song-almighty-and-faithful-god-is-here}}

\bibleverse{9} You who tell good news to Zion, go up on a high mountain.
You who tell good news to Jerusalem, lift up your voice with strength!
Lift it up! Don't be afraid! Say to the cities of Judah, ``Behold, your
God!'' \bibleverse{10} Behold, the Lord Yahweh will come as a mighty
one, and his arm will rule for him. Behold, his reward is with him, and
his recompense before him. \bibleverse{11} He will feed his flock like a
shepherd. He will gather the lambs in his arm, and carry them in his
bosom. He will gently lead those who have their young.

\hypertarget{the-greatness-of-god-in-creation}{%
\subsection{The greatness of God in
creation}\label{the-greatness-of-god-in-creation}}

\bibleverse{12} Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand,
and marked off the sky with his span, and calculated the dust of the
earth in a measuring basket, and weighed the mountains in scales, and
the hills in a balance? \bibleverse{13} Who has directed Yahweh's
Spirit, or has taught him as his counselor? \bibleverse{14} Who did he
take counsel with, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of
justice, and taught him knowledge, and showed him the way of
understanding? \bibleverse{15} Behold, the nations are like a drop in a
bucket, and are regarded as a speck of dust on a balance. Behold, he
lifts up the islands like a very little thing. \bibleverse{16} Lebanon
is not sufficient to burn, nor its animals sufficient for a burnt
offering.

\hypertarget{the-nothingness-of-all-peoples-of-all-idols-of-all-things-in-heaven-and-on-earth}{%
\subsection{The nothingness of all peoples, of all idols, of all things
in heaven and on
earth}\label{the-nothingness-of-all-peoples-of-all-idols-of-all-things-in-heaven-and-on-earth}}

\bibleverse{17} All the nations are like nothing before him. They are
regarded by him as less than nothing, and vanity. \bibleverse{18} To
whom then will you liken God? Or what likeness will you compare to him?
\bibleverse{19} A workman has cast an image, and the goldsmith overlays
it with gold, and casts silver chains for it. \bibleverse{20} He who is
too impoverished for such an offering chooses a tree that will not rot.
He seeks a skillful workman to set up a carved image for him that will
not be moved. \bibleverse{21} Haven't you known? Haven't you heard?
Haven't you been told from the beginning? Haven't you understood from
the foundations of the earth? \bibleverse{22} It is he who sits above
the circle of the earth, and its inhabitants are like grasshoppers; who
stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them out like a
tent to dwell in, \bibleverse{23} who brings princes to nothing, who
makes the judges of the earth meaningless. \bibleverse{24} They are
planted scarcely. They are sown scarcely. Their stock has scarcely taken
root in the ground. He merely blows on them, and they wither, and the
whirlwind takes them away as stubble. \bibleverse{25} ``To whom then
will you liken me? Who is my equal?'' says the Holy One. \bibleverse{26}
Lift up your eyes on high, and see who has created these, who brings out
their army by number. He calls them all by name. by the greatness of his
might, and because he is strong in power, not one is lacking.

\hypertarget{warning-of-despondency-despite-all-misfortunes}{%
\subsection{Warning of despondency despite all
misfortunes}\label{warning-of-despondency-despite-all-misfortunes}}

\bibleverse{27} Why do you say, Jacob, and speak, Israel, ``My way is
hidden from Yahweh, and the justice due me is disregarded by my God?''
\bibleverse{28} Haven't you known? Haven't you heard? The everlasting
God, Yahweh, the Creator of the ends of the earth, doesn't faint. He
isn't weary. His understanding is unsearchable. \bibleverse{29} He gives
power to the weak. He increases the strength of him who has no might.
\bibleverse{30} Even the youths faint and get weary, and the young men
utterly fall; \bibleverse{31} but those who wait for Yahweh will renew
their strength. They will mount up with wings like eagles. They will
run, and not be weary. They will walk, and not faint.

\hypertarget{god-as-ruler-of-the-history-of-nations-and-lord-of-prophecy}{%
\subsection{God as ruler of the history of nations and lord of
prophecy}\label{god-as-ruler-of-the-history-of-nations-and-lord-of-prophecy}}

\hypertarget{section-40}{%
\section{41}\label{section-40}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Keep silent before me, islands, and let the peoples
renew their strength. Let them come near, then let them speak. Let's
meet together for judgment. \bibleverse{2} Who has raised up one from
the east? Who called him to his feet in righteousness? He hands over
nations to him and makes him rule over kings. He gives them like the
dust to his sword, like the driven stubble to his bow. \bibleverse{3} He
pursues them and passes by safely, even by a way that he had not gone
with his feet. \bibleverse{4} Who has worked and done it, calling the
generations from the beginning? I, Yahweh, the first, and with the last,
I am he.'' \bibleverse{5} The islands have seen, and fear. The ends of
the earth tremble. They approach, and come. \bibleverse{6} Everyone
helps his neighbor. They say to their brothers, ``Be strong!''
\bibleverse{7} So the carpenter encourages the goldsmith. He who smooths
with the hammer encourages him who strikes the anvil, saying of the
soldering, ``It is good;'' and he fastens it with nails, that it might
not totter.

\hypertarget{israel-as-a-servant-of-god-chosen-in-abraham-and-not-rejected-since-then}{%
\subsection{Israel as a servant of God chosen in Abraham and not
rejected since
then}\label{israel-as-a-servant-of-god-chosen-in-abraham-and-not-rejected-since-then}}

\bibleverse{8} ``But you, Israel, my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen,
the offspring of Abraham my friend, \bibleverse{9} you whom I have taken
hold of from the ends of the earth, and called from its corners, and
said to you, `You are my servant. I have chosen you and have not cast
you away.' \bibleverse{10} Don't you be afraid, for I am with you. Don't
be dismayed, for I am your God. I will strengthen you. Yes, I will help
you. Yes, I will uphold you with the right hand of my righteousness.
\bibleverse{11} Behold, all those who are incensed against you will be
disappointed and confounded. Those who strive with you will be like
nothing, and shall perish. \bibleverse{12} You will seek them, and won't
find them, even those who contend with you. Those who war against you
will be as nothing, as a nonexistent thing. \bibleverse{13} For I,
Yahweh your God, will hold your right hand, saying to you, `Don't be
afraid. I will help you.'

\hypertarget{israel-as-the-apparently-poor-people-but-strong-and-blessed-in-god}{%
\subsection{Israel as the apparently poor people, but strong and blessed
in
God}\label{israel-as-the-apparently-poor-people-but-strong-and-blessed-in-god}}

\bibleverse{14} Don't be afraid, you worm Jacob, and you men of Israel.
I will help you,'' says Yahweh. ``Your Redeemer is the Holy One of
Israel. \bibleverse{15} Behold, I have made you into a new sharp
threshing instrument with teeth. You will thresh the mountains, and beat
them small, and will make the hills like chaff. \bibleverse{16} You will
winnow them, and the wind will carry them away, and the whirlwind will
scatter them. You will rejoice in Yahweh. You will glory in the Holy One
of Israel. \bibleverse{17} The poor and needy seek water, and there is
none. Their tongue fails for thirst. I, Yahweh, will answer them. I, the
God of Israel, will not forsake them. \bibleverse{18} I will open rivers
on the bare heights, and springs in the middle of the valleys. I will
make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
\bibleverse{19} I will put cedar, acacia, myrtle, and oil trees in the
wilderness. I will set cypress trees, pine, and box trees together in
the desert; \bibleverse{20} that they may see, know, consider, and
understand together, that Yahweh's hand has done this, and the Holy One
of Israel has created it.

\hypertarget{the-nothingness-of-the-idols-that-have-no-prophecy-while-god-brings-and-predicts-the-future}{%
\subsection{The nothingness of the idols that have no prophecy while God
brings and predicts the
future}\label{the-nothingness-of-the-idols-that-have-no-prophecy-while-god-brings-and-predicts-the-future}}

\bibleverse{21} Produce your cause,'' says Yahweh. ``Bring out your
strong reasons!'' says the King of Jacob. \bibleverse{22} ``Let them
announce and declare to us what will happen! Declare the former things,
what they are, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of
them; or show us things to come. \bibleverse{23} Declare the things that
are to come hereafter, that we may know that you are gods. Yes, do good,
or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and see it together.
\bibleverse{24} Behold, you are nothing, and your work is nothing. He
who chooses you is an abomination. \bibleverse{25} ``I have raised up
one from the north, and he has come, from the rising of the sun, one who
calls on my name, and he shall come on rulers as on mortar, and as the
potter treads clay. \bibleverse{26} Who has declared it from the
beginning, that we may know? and before, that we may say, `He is right?'
Surely, there is no one who declares. Surely, there is no one who shows.
Surely, there is no one who hears your words. \bibleverse{27} I am the
first to say to Zion, `Behold, look at them;' and I will give one who
brings good news to Jerusalem. \bibleverse{28} When I look, there is no
man, even among them there is no counselor who, when I ask, can answer a
word. \bibleverse{29} Behold, all of their deeds are vanity and nothing.
Their molten images are wind and confusion.

\hypertarget{gods-reference-to-his-chosen-servant-and-his-nature-and-work}{%
\subsection{God's reference to his chosen servant and his nature and
work}\label{gods-reference-to-his-chosen-servant-and-his-nature-and-work}}

\hypertarget{section-41}{%
\section{42}\label{section-41}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Behold, my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen, in whom
my soul delights: I have put my Spirit on him. He will bring justice to
the nations. \bibleverse{2} He will not shout, nor raise his voice, nor
cause it to be heard in the street. \bibleverse{3} He won't break a
bruised reed. He won't quench a dimly burning wick. He will faithfully
bring justice. \bibleverse{4} He will not fail nor be discouraged, until
he has set justice in the earth, and the islands wait for his law.''

\hypertarget{god-announces-his-missionary-call-to-his-servant}{%
\subsection{God announces his missionary call to his
servant}\label{god-announces-his-missionary-call-to-his-servant}}

\bibleverse{5} God Yahweh, he who created the heavens and stretched them
out, he who spread out the earth and that which comes out of it, he who
gives breath to its people and spirit to those who walk in it, says:
\bibleverse{6} ``I, Yahweh, have called you in righteousness. I will
hold your hand. I will keep you, and make you a covenant for the people,
as a light for the nations, \bibleverse{7} to open the blind eyes, to
bring the prisoners out of the dungeon, and those who sit in darkness
out of the prison. \bibleverse{8} ``I am Yahweh. That is my name. I will
not give my glory to another, nor my praise to engraved images.
\bibleverse{9} Behold, the former things have happened and I declare new
things. I tell you about them before they come up.''

\hypertarget{praise-the-lord-who-brings-about-salvation-especially-the-liberation-of-his-people-gods-promise-of-his-forceful-action-despite-the-idol-worshipers}{%
\subsection{Praise the Lord who brings about salvation (especially the
liberation of his people); God's Promise of His Forceful Action Despite
the Idol
Worshipers}\label{praise-the-lord-who-brings-about-salvation-especially-the-liberation-of-his-people-gods-promise-of-his-forceful-action-despite-the-idol-worshipers}}

\bibleverse{10} Sing to Yahweh a new song, and his praise from the end
of the earth, you who go down to the sea, and all that is therein, the
islands and their inhabitants. \bibleverse{11} Let the wilderness and
its cities raise their voices, with the villages that Kedar inhabits.
Let the inhabitants of Sela sing. Let them shout from the top of the
mountains! \bibleverse{12} Let them give glory to Yahweh, and declare
his praise in the islands. \bibleverse{13} Yahweh will go out like a
mighty man. He will stir up zeal like a man of war. He will raise a war
cry. Yes, he will shout aloud. He will triumph over his enemies.
\bibleverse{14} ``I have been silent a long time. I have been quiet and
restrained myself. Now I will cry out like a travailing woman. I will
both gasp and pant. \bibleverse{15} I will destroy mountains and hills,
and dry up all their herbs. I will make the rivers islands, and will dry
up the pools. \bibleverse{16} I will bring the blind by a way that they
don't know. I will lead them in paths that they don't know. I will make
darkness light before them, and crooked places straight. I will do these
things, and I will not forsake them. \bibleverse{17} ``Those who trust
in engraved images, who tell molten images, `You are our gods,' will be
turned back. They will be utterly disappointed.

\hypertarget{complain-about-the-blindness-and-inadequacy-of-todays-israel-the-servant-of-god}{%
\subsection{Complain about the blindness and inadequacy of today's
Israel, the servant of
God}\label{complain-about-the-blindness-and-inadequacy-of-todays-israel-the-servant-of-god}}

\bibleverse{18} ``Hear, you deaf, and look, you blind, that you may see.
\bibleverse{19} Who is blind, but my servant? Or who is as deaf as my
messenger whom I send? Who is as blind as he who is at peace, and as
blind as Yahweh's servant? \bibleverse{20} You see many things, but
don't observe. His ears are open, but he doesn't listen. \bibleverse{21}
It pleased Yahweh, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the law and
make it honorable. \bibleverse{22} But this is a robbed and plundered
people. All of them are snared in holes, and they are hidden in prisons.
They have become captives, and no one delivers, and a plunder, and no
one says, `Restore them!' \bibleverse{23} Who is there among you who
will give ear to this? Who will listen and hear for the time to come?
\bibleverse{24} Who gave Jacob as plunder, and Israel to the robbers?
Didn't Yahweh, he against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk
in his ways, and they disobeyed his law. \bibleverse{25} Therefore he
poured the fierceness of his anger on him, and the strength of battle.
It set him on fire all around, but he didn't know. It burned him, but he
didn't take it to heart.''

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-release-and-gathering-of-all-gods-people-from-all-over-heaven}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the release and gathering of all God's
people from all over
heaven}\label{announcement-of-the-release-and-gathering-of-all-gods-people-from-all-over-heaven}}

\hypertarget{section-42}{%
\section{43}\label{section-42}}

\bibleverse{1} But now Yahweh who created you, Jacob, and he who formed
you, Israel, says: ``Don't be afraid, for I have redeemed you. I have
called you by your name. You are mine. \bibleverse{2} When you pass
through the waters, I will be with you, and through the rivers, they
will not overflow you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be
burned, and flame will not scorch you. \bibleverse{3} For I am Yahweh
your God, the Holy One of Israel, your Savior. I have given Egypt as
your ransom, Ethiopia and Seba in your place. \bibleverse{4} Since you
have been precious and honored in my sight, and I have loved you,
therefore I will give people in your place, and nations instead of your
life. \bibleverse{5} Don't be afraid, for I am with you. I will bring
your offspring from the east, and gather you from the west.
\bibleverse{6} I will tell the north, `Give them up!' and tell the
south, `Don't hold them back! Bring my sons from far away, and my
daughters from the ends of the earth--- \bibleverse{7} everyone who is
called by my name, and whom I have created for my glory, whom I have
formed, yes, whom I have made.'\,''

\hypertarget{despite-israels-blindness-the-lord-testifies-as-the-true-god-to-the-dumb-idols-of-the-gentiles}{%
\subsection{Despite Israel's blindness, the Lord testifies as the true
God to the dumb idols of the
Gentiles}\label{despite-israels-blindness-the-lord-testifies-as-the-true-god-to-the-dumb-idols-of-the-gentiles}}

\bibleverse{8} Bring out the blind people who have eyes, and the deaf
who have ears. \bibleverse{9} Let all the nations be gathered together,
and let the peoples be assembled. Who among them can declare this, and
show us former things? Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be
justified, or let them hear, and say, ``That is true.'' \bibleverse{10}
``You are my witnesses,'' says Yahweh, ``With my servant whom I have
chosen; that you may know and believe me, and understand that I am he.
Before me there was no God formed, neither will there be after me.
\bibleverse{11} I myself am Yahweh. Besides me, there is no savior.
\bibleverse{12} I have declared, I have saved, and I have shown, and
there was no strange god among you. Therefore you are my witnesses'',
says Yahweh, ``and I am God. \bibleverse{13} Yes, since the day was, I
am he. There is no one who can deliver out of my hand. I will work, and
who can hinder it?''

\hypertarget{word-of-god-against-babylon}{%
\subsection{Word of God against
Babylon}\label{word-of-god-against-babylon}}

\bibleverse{14} Yahweh, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel says:
``For your sake, I have sent to Babylon, and I will bring all of them
down as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, in the ships of their rejoicing.
\bibleverse{15} I am Yahweh, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your
King.''

\hypertarget{gods-next-redemptive-act-compared-to-gods-previous-miracles}{%
\subsection{God's next redemptive act compared to God's previous
miracles}\label{gods-next-redemptive-act-compared-to-gods-previous-miracles}}

\bibleverse{16} Yahweh, who makes a way in the sea, and a path in the
mighty waters, \bibleverse{17} who brings out the chariot and horse, the
army and the mighty man (they lie down together, they shall not rise;
they are extinct, they are quenched like a wick) says: \bibleverse{18}
``Don't remember the former things, and don't consider the things of
old. \bibleverse{19} Behold, I will do a new thing. It springs out now.
Don't you know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers
in the desert. \bibleverse{20} The animals of the field, the jackals and
the ostriches, shall honor me, because I give water in the wilderness
and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen,
\bibleverse{21} the people which I formed for myself, that they might
declare my praise.

\hypertarget{israels-infidelity-and-guilt-of-sin-atoned-for-by-gods-free-grace}{%
\subsection{Israel's infidelity and guilt of sin atoned for by God's
free
grace}\label{israels-infidelity-and-guilt-of-sin-atoned-for-by-gods-free-grace}}

\bibleverse{22} Yet you have not called on me, Jacob; but you have been
weary of me, Israel. \bibleverse{23} You have not brought me any of your
sheep for burnt offerings, neither have you honored me with your
sacrifices. I have not burdened you with offerings, nor wearied you with
frankincense. \bibleverse{24} You have bought me no sweet cane with
money, nor have you filled me with the fat of your sacrifices, but you
have burdened me with your sins. You have wearied me with your
iniquities. \bibleverse{25} I, even I, am he who blots out your
transgressions for my own sake; and I will not remember your sins.
\bibleverse{26} Put me in remembrance. Let us plead together. Declare
your case, that you may be justified. \bibleverse{27} Your first father
sinned, and your teachers have transgressed against me. \bibleverse{28}
Therefore I will profane the princes of the sanctuary; and I will make
Jacob a curse, and Israel an insult.''

\hypertarget{they-promise-rich-divine-blessings-especially-the-dispensation-of-the-divine-spirit}{%
\subsection{They promise rich divine blessings, especially the
dispensation of the divine
spirit}\label{they-promise-rich-divine-blessings-especially-the-dispensation-of-the-divine-spirit}}

\hypertarget{section-43}{%
\section{44}\label{section-43}}

\bibleverse{1} Yet listen now, Jacob my servant, and Israel, whom I have
chosen. \bibleverse{2} This is what Yahweh who made you, and formed you
from the womb, who will help you says: ``Don't be afraid, Jacob my
servant; and you, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen. \bibleverse{3} For I
will pour water on him who is thirsty, and streams on the dry ground. I
will pour my Spirit on your descendants, and my blessing on your
offspring; \bibleverse{4} and they will spring up among the grass, as
willows by the watercourses. \bibleverse{5} One will say, `I am
Yahweh's.' Another will be called by the name of Jacob; and another will
write with his hand `to Yahweh,' and honor the name of Israel.''

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-unique-divinity-of-the-lord-and-the-contempt-of-idolatry}{%
\subsection{Reference to the unique divinity of the Lord and the
contempt of
idolatry}\label{reference-to-the-unique-divinity-of-the-lord-and-the-contempt-of-idolatry}}

\bibleverse{6} This is what Yahweh, the King of Israel, and his
Redeemer, Yahweh of Armies, says: ``I am the first, and I am the last;
and besides me there is no God. \bibleverse{7} Who is like me? Who will
call, and will declare it, and set it in order for me, since I
established the ancient people? Let them declare the things that are
coming, and that will happen. \bibleverse{8} Don't fear, neither be
afraid. Haven't I declared it to you long ago, and shown it? You are my
witnesses. Is there a God besides me? Indeed, there is not. I don't know
any other Rock.'' \bibleverse{9} Everyone who makes a carved image is
vain. The things that they delight in will not profit. Their own
witnesses don't see, nor know, that they may be disappointed.
\bibleverse{10} Who has fashioned a god, or molds an image that is
profitable for nothing? \bibleverse{11} Behold, all his fellows will be
disappointed; and the workmen are mere men. Let them all be gathered
together. Let them stand up. They will fear. They will be put to shame
together.

\hypertarget{mocking-representation-of-the-creation-of-idols}{%
\subsection{Mocking representation of the creation of
idols}\label{mocking-representation-of-the-creation-of-idols}}

\bibleverse{12} The blacksmith takes an ax, works in the coals, fashions
it with hammers, and works it with his strong arm. He is hungry, and his
strength fails; he drinks no water, and is faint. \bibleverse{13} The
carpenter stretches out a line. He marks it out with a pencil. He shapes
it with planes. He marks it out with compasses, and shapes it like the
figure of a man, with the beauty of a man, to reside in a house.
\bibleverse{14} He cuts down cedars for himself, and takes the cypress
and the oak, and strengthens for himself one among the trees of the
forest. He plants a cypress tree, and the rain nourishes it.
\bibleverse{15} Then it will be for a man to burn; and he takes some of
it and warms himself. Yes, he burns it and bakes bread. Yes, he makes a
god and worships it; he makes it a carved image, and falls down to it.
\bibleverse{16} He burns part of it in the fire. With part of it, he
eats meat. He roasts a roast and is satisfied. Yes, he warms himself and
says, ``Aha! I am warm. I have seen the fire.'' \bibleverse{17} The rest
of it he makes into a god, even his engraved image. He bows down to it
and worships, and prays to it, and says, ``Deliver me, for you are my
god!'' \bibleverse{18} They don't know, neither do they consider, for he
has shut their eyes, that they can't see, and their hearts, that they
can't understand. \bibleverse{19} No one thinks, neither is there
knowledge nor understanding to say, ``I have burned part of it in the
fire. Yes, I have also baked bread on its coals. I have roasted meat and
eaten it. Shall I make the rest of it into an abomination? Shall I bow
down to a tree trunk?'' \bibleverse{20} He feeds on ashes. A deceived
heart has turned him aside; and he can't deliver his soul, nor say,
``Isn't there a lie in my right hand?''

\hypertarget{reminder-of-a-new-fidelity-to-god-and-hymn-of-final-praise}{%
\subsection{Reminder of a new fidelity to God and hymn of final
praise}\label{reminder-of-a-new-fidelity-to-god-and-hymn-of-final-praise}}

\bibleverse{21} Remember these things, Jacob and Israel, for you are my
servant. I have formed you. You are my servant. Israel, you will not be
forgotten by me. \bibleverse{22} I have blotted out, as a thick cloud,
your transgressions, and, as a cloud, your sins. Return to me, for I
have redeemed you. \bibleverse{23} Sing, you heavens, for Yahweh has
done it! Shout, you lower parts of the earth! Break out into singing,
you mountains, O forest, all of your trees, for Yahweh has redeemed
Jacob, and will glorify himself in Israel.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-great-divine-plan}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the great divine
plan}\label{announcement-of-the-great-divine-plan}}

\bibleverse{24} Yahweh, your Redeemer, and he who formed you from the
womb says: ``I am Yahweh, who makes all things; who alone stretches out
the heavens; who spreads out the earth by myself; \bibleverse{25} who
frustrates the signs of the liars, and makes diviners mad; who turns
wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish; \bibleverse{26}
who confirms the word of his servant, and performs the counsel of his
messengers; who says of Jerusalem, `She will be inhabited;' and of the
cities of Judah, `They will be built,' and `I will raise up its waste
places;' \bibleverse{27} who says to the deep, `Be dry,' and `I will dry
up your rivers,' \bibleverse{28} who says of Cyrus, `He is my shepherd,
and shall perform all my pleasure,' even saying of Jerusalem, `She will
be built;' and of the temple, `Your foundation will be laid.'\,''

\hypertarget{section-44}{%
\section{45}\label{section-44}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh says to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I
have held to subdue nations before him and strip kings of their armor,
to open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be shut:
\bibleverse{2} ``I will go before you and make the rough places smooth.
I will break the doors of bronze in pieces and cut apart the bars of
iron. \bibleverse{3} I will give you the treasures of darkness and
hidden riches of secret places, that you may know that it is I, Yahweh,
who calls you by your name, even the God of Israel. \bibleverse{4} For
Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel my chosen, I have called you by your
name. I have given you a title, though you have not known me.
\bibleverse{5} I am Yahweh, and there is no one else. Besides me, there
is no God. I will strengthen\footnote{\textbf{45:5} or, equip} you,
though you have not known me, \bibleverse{6} that they may know from the
rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is no one besides me. I
am Yahweh, and there is no one else. \bibleverse{7} I form the light and
create darkness. I make peace and create calamity. I am Yahweh, who does
all these things. \bibleverse{8} Rain, you heavens, from above, and let
the skies pour down righteousness. Let the earth open, that it may
produce salvation, and let it cause righteousness to spring up with it.
I, Yahweh, have created it. \bibleverse{9} Woe to him who strives with
his Maker--- a clay pot among the clay pots of the earth! Shall the clay
ask him who fashions it, `What are you making?' or your work, `He has no
hands?' \bibleverse{10} Woe to him who says to a father, `What have you
become the father of?' or to a mother, `What have you given birth
to?'\,'' \bibleverse{11} Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel and his Maker
says: ``You ask me about the things that are to come, concerning my
sons, and you command me concerning the work of my hands!
\bibleverse{12} I have made the earth, and created man on it. I, even my
hands, have stretched out the heavens. I have commanded all their army.
\bibleverse{13} I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will make
all his ways straight. He shall build my city, and he shall let my
exiles go free, not for price nor reward,'' says Yahweh of Armies.
\bibleverse{14} Yahweh says: ``The labor of Egypt, and the merchandise
of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, men of stature, will come over to you, and
they will be yours. They will go after you. They shall come over in
chains. They will bow down to you. They will make supplication to you:
`Surely God is in you; and there is no one else. There is no other god.
\bibleverse{15} Most certainly you are a God who has hidden yourself,
God of Israel, the Savior.'\,'' \bibleverse{16} They will be
disappointed, yes, confounded, all of them. Those who are makers of
idols will go into confusion together. \bibleverse{17} Israel will be
saved by Yahweh with an everlasting salvation. You will not be
disappointed nor confounded to ages everlasting. \bibleverse{18} For
Yahweh who created the heavens, the God who formed the earth and made
it, who established it and didn't create it a waste, who formed it to be
inhabited says: ``I am Yahweh. There is no other. \bibleverse{19} I have
not spoken in secret, in a place of the land of darkness. I didn't say
to the offspring of Jacob, `Seek me in vain.' I, Yahweh, speak
righteousness. I declare things that are right. \bibleverse{20}
``Assemble yourselves and come. Draw near together, you who have escaped
from the nations. Those have no knowledge who carry the wood of their
engraved image, and pray to a god that can't save. \bibleverse{21}
Declare and present it. Yes, let them take counsel together. Who has
shown this from ancient time? Who has declared it of old? Haven't I,
Yahweh? There is no other God besides me, a just God and a Savior. There
is no one besides me. \bibleverse{22} ``Look to me, and be saved, all
the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is no other.
\bibleverse{23} I have sworn by myself. The word has gone out of my
mouth in righteousness, and will not be revoked, that to me every knee
shall bow, every tongue shall take an oath. \bibleverse{24} They will
say of me, `There is righteousness and strength only in Yahweh.'\,''
Even to him will men come. All those who raged against him will be
disappointed. \bibleverse{25} All the offspring of Israel will be
justified in Yahweh, and will rejoice!

\hypertarget{the-miserable-end-of-the-babylonian-idols}{%
\subsection{The miserable end of the Babylonian
idols}\label{the-miserable-end-of-the-babylonian-idols}}

\hypertarget{section-45}{%
\section{46}\label{section-45}}

\bibleverse{1} Bel bows down. Nebo stoops. Their idols are carried by
animals, and on the livestock. The things that you carried around are
heavy loads, a burden for the weary. \bibleverse{2} They stoop and they
bow down together. They could not deliver the burden, but they have gone
into captivity.

\hypertarget{gods-reminder-of-the-loyalty-shown-to-his-people-hitherto-and-the-folly-of-all-idolatry}{%
\subsection{God's reminder of the loyalty shown to his people hitherto
and the folly of all
idolatry}\label{gods-reminder-of-the-loyalty-shown-to-his-people-hitherto-and-the-folly-of-all-idolatry}}

\bibleverse{3} ``Listen to me, house of Jacob, and all the remnant of
the house of Israel, that have been carried from their birth, that have
been carried from the womb. \bibleverse{4} Even to old age I am he, and
even to gray hairs I will carry you. I have made, and I will bear. Yes,
I will carry, and will deliver. \bibleverse{5} ``To whom will you
compare me, and consider my equal, and compare me, as if we were the
same? \bibleverse{6} Some pour out gold from the bag, and weigh silver
in the balance. They hire a goldsmith, and he makes it a god. They fall
down--- yes, they worship. \bibleverse{7} They bear it on their
shoulder. They carry it, and set it in its place, and it stands there.
It cannot move from its place. Yes, one may cry to it, yet it can not
answer. It cannot save him out of his trouble.

\hypertarget{encouraging-hint-of-the-nearness-of-salvation}{%
\subsection{Encouraging hint of the nearness of
salvation}\label{encouraging-hint-of-the-nearness-of-salvation}}

\bibleverse{8} ``Remember this, and show yourselves men. Bring it to
mind again, you transgressors. \bibleverse{9} Remember the former things
of old; for I am God, and there is no other. I am God, and there is none
like me. \bibleverse{10} I declare the end from the beginning, and from
ancient times things that are not yet done. I say: My counsel will
stand, and I will do all that I please. \bibleverse{11} I call a
ravenous bird from the east, the man of my counsel from a far country.
Yes, I have spoken. I will also bring it to pass. I have planned. I will
also do it. \bibleverse{12} Listen to me, you stubborn-hearted, who are
far from righteousness! \bibleverse{13} I bring my righteousness near.
It is not far off, and my salvation will not wait. I will grant
salvation to Zion, my glory to Israel.

\hypertarget{humiliation-of-the-proud-and-exuberant-ruler-to-the-fate-of-a-slave}{%
\subsection{Humiliation of the proud and exuberant ruler to the fate of
a
slave}\label{humiliation-of-the-proud-and-exuberant-ruler-to-the-fate-of-a-slave}}

\hypertarget{section-46}{%
\section{47}\label{section-46}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Come down and sit in the dust, virgin daughter of
Babylon. Sit on the ground without a throne, daughter of the Chaldeans.
For you will no longer be called tender and delicate. \bibleverse{2}
Take the millstones and grind flour. Remove your veil, lift up your
skirt, uncover your legs, and wade through the rivers. \bibleverse{3}
Your nakedness will be uncovered. Yes, your shame will be seen. I will
take vengeance, and will spare no one.'' \bibleverse{4} Our Redeemer,
Yahweh of Armies is his name, is the Holy One of Israel.

\hypertarget{humiliation-of-the-world-ruler-as-punishment-for-his-cruelty-towards-judah-and-excessive-carelessness}{%
\subsection{Humiliation of the world ruler as punishment for his cruelty
towards Judah and excessive
carelessness}\label{humiliation-of-the-world-ruler-as-punishment-for-his-cruelty-towards-judah-and-excessive-carelessness}}

\bibleverse{5} ``Sit in silence, and go into darkness, daughter of the
Chaldeans. For you shall no longer be called the mistress of kingdoms.
\bibleverse{6} I was angry with my people. I profaned my inheritance and
gave them into your hand. You showed them no mercy. You laid a very
heavy yoke on the aged. \bibleverse{7} You said, `I will be a princess
forever,' so that you didn't lay these things to your heart, nor did you
remember the results.

\hypertarget{criminal-judgment-falling-on-the-impious-haughty-mistress}{%
\subsection{Criminal judgment falling on the impious haughty
mistress}\label{criminal-judgment-falling-on-the-impious-haughty-mistress}}

\bibleverse{8} ``Now therefore hear this, you who are given to
pleasures, who sit securely, who say in your heart, `I am, and there is
no one else besides me. I won't sit as a widow, neither will I know the
loss of children.' \bibleverse{9} But these two things will come to you
in a moment in one day: the loss of children and widowhood. They will
come on you in their full measure, in the multitude of your sorceries,
and the great abundance of your enchantments. \bibleverse{10} For you
have trusted in your wickedness. You have said, `No one sees me.' Your
wisdom and your knowledge has perverted you. You have said in your
heart, `I am, and there is no one else besides me.' \bibleverse{11}
Therefore disaster will come on you. You won't know when it dawns.
Mischief will fall on you. You won't be able to put it away. Desolation
will come on you suddenly, which you don't understand.

\hypertarget{magical-arts-and-secret-sciences-cannot-prevent-ruin}{%
\subsection{Magical arts and secret sciences cannot prevent
ruin}\label{magical-arts-and-secret-sciences-cannot-prevent-ruin}}

\bibleverse{12} ``Stand now with your enchantments and with the
multitude of your sorceries, in which you have labored from your youth,
as if you might profit, as if you might prevail. \bibleverse{13} You are
wearied in the multitude of your counsels. Now let the astrologers, the
stargazers, and the monthly prognosticators stand up and save you from
the things that will happen to you. \bibleverse{14} Behold, they are
like stubble. The fire will burn them. They won't deliver themselves
from the power of the flame. It won't be a coal to warm at or a fire to
sit by. \bibleverse{15} The things that you labored in will be like
this: those who have trafficked with you from your youth will each
wander in his own way. There will be no one to save you.

\hypertarget{hard-way-to-address-stubborn-people}{%
\subsection{Hard way to address stubborn
people}\label{hard-way-to-address-stubborn-people}}

\hypertarget{section-47}{%
\section{48}\label{section-47}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Hear this, house of Jacob, you who are called by the
name of Israel, and have come out of the waters of Judah. You swear by
Yahweh's name, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth,
nor in righteousness--- \bibleverse{2} for they call themselves citizens
of the holy city, and rely on the God of Israel; Yahweh of Armies is his
name.

\hypertarget{previous-prophecies-have-remained-ineffective-and-new-promises-of-salvation-meet-an-unrefined-people}{%
\subsection{Previous prophecies have remained ineffective, and new
promises of salvation meet an unrefined
people}\label{previous-prophecies-have-remained-ineffective-and-new-promises-of-salvation-meet-an-unrefined-people}}

\bibleverse{3} I have declared the former things from of old. Yes, they
went out of my mouth, and I revealed them. I did them suddenly, and they
happened. \bibleverse{4} Because I knew that you are obstinate, and your
neck is an iron sinew, and your brow bronze; \bibleverse{5} therefore I
have declared it to you from of old; before it came to pass I showed it
to you; lest you should say, `My idol has done them. My engraved image
and my molten image has commanded them.' \bibleverse{6} You have heard
it. Now see all this. And you, won't you declare it? ``I have shown you
new things from this time, even hidden things, which you have not known.
\bibleverse{7} They are created now, and not from of old. Before today,
you didn't hear them, lest you should say, `Behold, I knew them.'
\bibleverse{8} Yes, you didn't hear. Yes, you didn't know. Yes, from of
old your ear was not opened, for I knew that you dealt very
treacherously, and were called a transgressor from the womb.
\bibleverse{9} For my name's sake, I will defer my anger, and for my
praise, I hold it back for you so that I don't cut you off.
\bibleverse{10} Behold, I have refined you, but not as silver. I have
chosen you in the furnace of affliction. \bibleverse{11} For my own
sake, for my own sake, I will do it; for how would my name be profaned?
I will not give my glory to another.

\hypertarget{new-reference-to-the-call-of-cyrus-and-the-terrible-consequences-of-a-previous-disobedience}{%
\subsection{New reference to the call of Cyrus and the terrible
consequences of a previous
disobedience}\label{new-reference-to-the-call-of-cyrus-and-the-terrible-consequences-of-a-previous-disobedience}}

\bibleverse{12} ``Listen to me, O Jacob, and Israel my called: I am he.
I am the first. I am also the last. \bibleverse{13} Yes, my hand has
laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand has spread out the
heavens. when I call to them, they stand up together. \bibleverse{14}
``Assemble yourselves, all of you, and hear! Who among them has declared
these things? He whom Yahweh loves will do what he likes to Babylon, and
his arm will be against the Chaldeans. \bibleverse{15} I, even I, have
spoken. Yes, I have called him. I have brought him and he shall make his
way prosperous. \bibleverse{16} ``Come near to me and hear this: ``From
the beginning I have not spoken in secret; from the time that it
happened, I was there.'' Now the Lord Yahweh has sent me with his
Spirit. \bibleverse{17} Yahweh, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel,
says: ``I am Yahweh your God, who teaches you to profit, who leads you
by the way that you should go. \bibleverse{18} Oh that you had listened
to my commandments! Then your peace would have been like a river and
your righteousness like the waves of the sea. \bibleverse{19} Your
offspring also would have been as the sand and the descendants of your
body like its grains. His name would not be cut off nor destroyed from
before me.''

\hypertarget{call-to-return-from-babylon-and-cheers-from-the-redeemed}{%
\subsection{Call to return from Babylon and cheers from the
redeemed}\label{call-to-return-from-babylon-and-cheers-from-the-redeemed}}

\bibleverse{20} Leave Babylon! Flee from the Chaldeans! With a voice of
singing announce this, tell it even to the end of the earth; say,
``Yahweh has redeemed his servant Jacob!'' \bibleverse{21} They didn't
thirst when he led them through the deserts. He caused the waters to
flow out of the rock for them. He also split the rock and the waters
gushed out. \bibleverse{22} ``There is no peace'', says Yahweh, ``for
the wicked.''

\hypertarget{speaks-of-the-servant-to-the-pagans-about-his-trade-according-to-the-divine-will}{%
\subsection{Speaks of the servant to the pagans about his trade
according to the divine
will}\label{speaks-of-the-servant-to-the-pagans-about-his-trade-according-to-the-divine-will}}

\hypertarget{section-48}{%
\section{49}\label{section-48}}

\bibleverse{1} Listen, islands, to me. Listen, you peoples, from afar:
Yahweh has called me from the womb; from the inside of my mother, he has
mentioned my name. \bibleverse{2} He has made my mouth like a sharp
sword. He has hidden me in the shadow of his hand. He has made me a
polished shaft. He has kept me close in his quiver. \bibleverse{3} He
said to me, ``You are my servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.''
\bibleverse{4} But I said, ``I have labored in vain. I have spent my
strength in vain for nothing; yet surely the justice due to me is with
Yahweh, and my reward with my God.'' \bibleverse{5} Now Yahweh, he who
formed me from the womb to be his servant, says to bring Jacob again to
him, and to gather Israel to him, for I am honorable in Yahweh's eyes,
and my God has become my strength. \bibleverse{6} Indeed, he says, ``It
is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the
tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also
give you as a light to the nations, that you may be my salvation to the
end of the earth.''

\hypertarget{god-promises-the-greatest-glorification-to-his-deeply-humiliated-people}{%
\subsection{God promises the greatest glorification to his deeply
humiliated
people}\label{god-promises-the-greatest-glorification-to-his-deeply-humiliated-people}}

\bibleverse{7} Yahweh, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, says to
him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a servant of
rulers: ``Kings shall see and rise up, princes, and they shall worship,
because of Yahweh who is faithful, even the Holy One of Israel, who has
chosen you.'' \bibleverse{8} Yahweh says, ``I have answered you in an
acceptable time. I have helped you in a day of salvation. I will
preserve you and give you for a covenant of the people, to raise up the
land, to make them inherit the desolate heritage, \bibleverse{9} saying
to those who are bound, `Come out!'; to those who are in darkness, `Show
yourselves!' ``They shall feed along the paths, and their pasture shall
be on all treeless heights. \bibleverse{10} They shall not hunger nor
thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun strike them, for he who has mercy
on them will lead them. He will guide them by springs of water.
\bibleverse{11} I will make all my mountains a road, and my highways
shall be exalted. \bibleverse{12} Behold, these shall come from afar,
and behold, these from the north and from the west, and these from the
land of Sinim.'' \bibleverse{13} Sing, heavens, and be joyful, earth!
Break out into singing, mountains! For Yahweh has comforted his people,
and will have compassion on his afflicted.

\hypertarget{comfort-of-downcast-zion-with-the-promise-of-speedy-restoration-and-a-plentiful-population}{%
\subsection{Comfort of downcast Zion with the promise of speedy
restoration and a plentiful
population}\label{comfort-of-downcast-zion-with-the-promise-of-speedy-restoration-and-a-plentiful-population}}

\bibleverse{14} But Zion said, ``Yahweh has forsaken me, and the Lord
has forgotten me.'' \bibleverse{15} ``Can a woman forget her nursing
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yes,
these may forget, yet I will not forget you! \bibleverse{16} Behold, I
have engraved you on the palms of my hands. Your walls are continually
before me. \bibleverse{17} Your children hurry. Your destroyers and
those who devastated you will leave you. \bibleverse{18} Lift up your
eyes all around, and see: all these gather themselves together, and come
to you. As I live,'' says Yahweh, ``you shall surely clothe yourself
with them all as with an ornament, and dress yourself with them, like a
bride. \bibleverse{19} ``For, as for your waste and your desolate
places, and your land that has been destroyed, surely now that land will
be too small for the inhabitants, and those who swallowed you up will be
far away. \bibleverse{20} The children of your bereavement will say in
your ears, `This place is too small for me. Give me a place to live in.'
\bibleverse{21} Then you will say in your heart, `Who has conceived
these for me, since I have been bereaved of my children and am alone, an
exile, and wandering back and forth? Who has brought these up? Behold, I
was left alone. Where were these?'\,''

\hypertarget{gentiles-as-submissive-servants-and-caretakers-of-gods-people}{%
\subsection{Gentiles as submissive servants and caretakers of God's
people}\label{gentiles-as-submissive-servants-and-caretakers-of-gods-people}}

\bibleverse{22} The Lord Yahweh says, ``Behold, I will lift up my hand
to the nations, and lift up my banner to the peoples. They shall bring
your sons in their bosom, and your daughters shall be carried on their
shoulders. \bibleverse{23} Kings shall be your foster fathers, and their
queens your nursing mothers. They will bow down to you with their faces
to the earth, and lick the dust of your feet. Then you will know that I
am Yahweh; and those who wait for me won't be disappointed.''

\hypertarget{almighty-god-himself-will-overthrow-the-ruler-of-israel}{%
\subsection{Almighty God himself will overthrow the ruler of
Israel}\label{almighty-god-himself-will-overthrow-the-ruler-of-israel}}

\bibleverse{24} Shall the plunder be taken from the mighty, or the
lawful captives be delivered? \bibleverse{25} But Yahweh says, ``Even
the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the plunder
retrieved from the fierce, for I will contend with him who contends with
you and I will save your children. \bibleverse{26} I will feed those who
oppress you with their own flesh; and they will be drunk on their own
blood, as with sweet wine. Then all flesh shall know that I, Yahweh, am
your Savior and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.''

\hypertarget{god-has-not-cast-out-or-sold-his-people-for-good-has-the-right-and-the-power-to-redeem-it}{%
\subsection{God has not cast out or sold his people for good; has the
right and the power to redeem
it}\label{god-has-not-cast-out-or-sold-his-people-for-good-has-the-right-and-the-power-to-redeem-it}}

\hypertarget{section-49}{%
\section{50}\label{section-49}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh says, ``Where is the bill of your mother's
divorce, with which I have put her away? Or to which of my creditors
have I sold you? Behold, you were sold for your iniquities, and your
mother was put away for your transgressions. \bibleverse{2} Why, when I
came, was there no one? When I called, why was there no one to answer?
Is my hand shortened at all, that it can't redeem? Or have I no power to
deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a
wilderness. Their fish stink because there is no water, and die of
thirst. \bibleverse{3} I clothe the heavens with blackness. I make
sackcloth their covering.''

\hypertarget{among-the-gifts-that-god-has-given-him-the-servant-of-god-places-special-emphasis-on-professional-loyalty-firmness-of-faith-and-tolerance}{%
\subsection{Among the gifts that God has given him, the servant of God
places special emphasis on professional loyalty, firmness of faith and
tolerance}\label{among-the-gifts-that-god-has-given-him-the-servant-of-god-places-special-emphasis-on-professional-loyalty-firmness-of-faith-and-tolerance}}

\bibleverse{4} The Lord Yahweh has given me the tongue of those who are
taught, that I may know how to sustain with words him who is weary. He
awakens morning by morning, he awakens my ear to hear as those who are
taught. \bibleverse{5} The Lord Yahweh has opened my ear. I was not
rebellious. I have not turned back. \bibleverse{6} I gave my back to
those who beat me, and my cheeks to those who plucked off the hair. I
didn't hide my face from shame and spitting. \bibleverse{7} For the Lord
Yahweh will help me. Therefore I have not been confounded. Therefore I
have set my face like a flint, and I know that I won't be disappointed.
\bibleverse{8} He who justifies me is near. Who will bring charges
against me? Let us stand up together. Who is my adversary? Let him come
near to me. \bibleverse{9} Behold, the Lord Yahweh will help me! Who is
he who will condemn me? Behold, they will all grow old like a garment.
The moths will eat them up.

\hypertarget{encourage-the-godly-and-threaten-violent-and-ungodly-opponents}{%
\subsection{Encourage the godly and threaten violent and ungodly
opponents}\label{encourage-the-godly-and-threaten-violent-and-ungodly-opponents}}

\bibleverse{10} Who among you fears Yahweh and obeys the voice of his
servant? He who walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in
Yahweh's name, and rely on his God. \bibleverse{11} Behold, all you who
kindle a fire, who adorn yourselves with torches around yourselves, walk
in the flame of your fire, and among the torches that you have kindled.
You will have this from my hand: you will lie down in sorrow.

\hypertarget{speech-of-heartfelt-admonition-and-comforting-encouragement-for-those-who-long-for-salvation-among-the-people}{%
\subsection{Speech of heartfelt admonition and comforting encouragement
for those who long for salvation among the
people}\label{speech-of-heartfelt-admonition-and-comforting-encouragement-for-those-who-long-for-salvation-among-the-people}}

\hypertarget{section-50}{%
\section{51}\label{section-50}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Listen to me, you who follow after righteousness, you
who seek Yahweh. Look to the rock you were cut from, and to the quarry
you were dug from. \bibleverse{2} Look to Abraham your father, and to
Sarah who bore you; for when he was but one I called him, I blessed him,
and made him many. \bibleverse{3} For Yahweh has comforted Zion. He has
comforted all her waste places, and has made her wilderness like Eden,
and her desert like the garden of Yahweh. Joy and gladness will be found
in them, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. \bibleverse{4} ``Listen
to me, my people; and hear me, my nation, for a law will go out from me,
and I will establish my justice for a light to the peoples.
\bibleverse{5} My righteousness is near. My salvation has gone out, and
my arms will judge the peoples. The islands will wait for me, and they
will trust my arm. \bibleverse{6} Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and
look at the earth beneath; for the heavens will vanish away like smoke,
and the earth will wear out like a garment. Its inhabitants will die in
the same way, but my salvation will be forever, and my righteousness
will not be abolished. \bibleverse{7} ``Listen to me, you who know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law. Don't fear the
reproach of men, and don't be dismayed at their insults. \bibleverse{8}
For the moth will eat them up like a garment, and the worm will eat them
like wool; but my righteousness will be forever, and my salvation to all
generations.''

\hypertarget{petition-to-god-to-show-again-his-omnipotence-for-the-salvation-of-his-people}{%
\subsection{Petition to God to show again his omnipotence for the
salvation of his
people}\label{petition-to-god-to-show-again-his-omnipotence-for-the-salvation-of-his-people}}

\bibleverse{9} Awake, awake, put on strength, arm of Yahweh! Awake, as
in the days of old, the generations of ancient times. Isn't it you who
cut Rahab in pieces, who pierced the monster? \bibleverse{10} Isn't it
you who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep; who made the
depths of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass over? \bibleverse{11}
Those ransomed by Yahweh will return, and come with singing to Zion.
Everlasting joy shall be on their heads. They will obtain gladness and
joy. Sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

\hypertarget{new-consolation-and-encouragement-of-the-people-by-god}{%
\subsection{New consolation and encouragement of the people by
God}\label{new-consolation-and-encouragement-of-the-people-by-god}}

\bibleverse{12} ``I, even I, am he who comforts you. Who are you, that
you are afraid of man who shall die, and of the son of man who will be
made as grass? \bibleverse{13} Have you forgotten Yahweh your Maker, who
stretched out the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? Do you
live in fear continually all day because of the fury of the oppressor,
when he prepares to destroy? Where is the fury of the oppressor?
\bibleverse{14} The captive exile will speedily be freed. He will not
die and go down into the pit. His bread won't fail. \bibleverse{15} For
I am Yahweh your God, who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar.
Yahweh of Armies is his name. \bibleverse{16} I have put my words in
your mouth and have covered you in the shadow of my hand, that I may
plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and tell Zion,
`You are my people.'\,''

\hypertarget{description-of-the-situation-of-the-city-which-has-been-severely-tested-by-the-falling-cup-of-god-and-the-announcement-of-redemption}{%
\subsection{Description of the situation of the city, which has been
severely tested by the falling cup of God, and the announcement of
redemption}\label{description-of-the-situation-of-the-city-which-has-been-severely-tested-by-the-falling-cup-of-god-and-the-announcement-of-redemption}}

\bibleverse{17} Awake, awake! Stand up, Jerusalem, you who have drunk
from Yahweh's hand the cup of his wrath. You have drunken the bowl of
the cup of staggering, and drained it. \bibleverse{18} There is no one
to guide her among all the sons to whom she has given birth; and there
is no one who takes her by the hand among all the sons whom she has
brought up. \bibleverse{19} These two things have happened to you--- who
will grieve with you?--- desolation and destruction, and famine and the
sword. How can I comfort you? \bibleverse{20} Your sons have fainted.
They lie at the head of all the streets, like an antelope in a net. They
are full of Yahweh's wrath, the rebuke of your God. \bibleverse{21}
Therefore now hear this, you afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:
\bibleverse{22} Your Lord Yahweh, your God who pleads the cause of his
people, says, ``Behold, I have taken out of your hand the cup of
staggering, even the bowl of the cup of my wrath. You will not drink it
any more. \bibleverse{23} I will put it into the hand of those who
afflict you, who have said to your soul, `Bow down, that we may walk
over you;' and you have laid your back as the ground, like a street to
those who walk over.''

\hypertarget{invitation-to-zion-to-prepare-worthily-to-receive-the-redeemed}{%
\subsection{Invitation to Zion to prepare worthily to receive the
redeemed}\label{invitation-to-zion-to-prepare-worthily-to-receive-the-redeemed}}

\hypertarget{section-51}{%
\section{52}\label{section-51}}

\bibleverse{1} Awake, awake! Put on your strength, Zion. Put on your
beautiful garments, Jerusalem, the holy city, for from now on the
uncircumcised and the unclean will no more come into you. \bibleverse{2}
Shake yourself from the dust! Arise, sit up, Jerusalem! Release yourself
from the bonds of your neck, captive daughter of Zion! \bibleverse{3}
For Yahweh says, ``You were sold for nothing; and you will be redeemed
without money.'' \bibleverse{4} For the Lord Yahweh says: ``My people
went down at the first into Egypt to live there; and the Assyrian has
oppressed them without cause. \bibleverse{5} ``Now therefore, what do I
do here,'' says Yahweh, ``seeing that my people are taken away for
nothing? Those who rule over them mock,'' says Yahweh, ``and my name is
blasphemed continually all day long. \bibleverse{6} Therefore my people
shall know my name. Therefore they shall know in that day that I am he
who speaks. Behold, it is I.''

\hypertarget{invitation-to-rejoice-at-the-return-of-god-and-the-redeemed-to-zion}{%
\subsection{Invitation to rejoice at the return of God and the redeemed
to
Zion}\label{invitation-to-rejoice-at-the-return-of-god-and-the-redeemed-to-zion}}

\bibleverse{7} How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of him who
brings good news, who publishes peace, who brings good news, who
proclaims salvation, who says to Zion, ``Your God reigns!''
\bibleverse{8} Your watchmen lift up their voice. Together they sing;
for they shall see eye to eye when Yahweh returns to Zion.
\bibleverse{9} Break out into joy! Sing together, you waste places of
Jerusalem; for Yahweh has comforted his people. He has redeemed
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{10} Yahweh has made his holy arm bare in the eyes
of all the nations. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of
our God. \bibleverse{11} Depart! Depart! Go out from there! Touch no
unclean thing! Go out from among her! Cleanse yourselves, you who carry
Yahweh's vessels. \bibleverse{12} For you shall not go out in haste,
neither shall you go by flight; for Yahweh will go before you, and the
God of Israel will be your rear guard.

\hypertarget{god-announces-the-humiliation-suffered-and-the-brilliant-exaltation-of-his-servant}{%
\subsection{God announces the humiliation suffered and the brilliant
exaltation of his
servant}\label{god-announces-the-humiliation-suffered-and-the-brilliant-exaltation-of-his-servant}}

\bibleverse{13} Behold, my servant will deal wisely. He will be exalted
and lifted up, and will be very high. \bibleverse{14} Just as many were
astonished at you--- his appearance was marred more than any man, and
his form more than the sons of men--- \bibleverse{15} so he will
cleanse\footnote{\textbf{52:15} or, sprinkle} many nations. Kings will
shut their mouths at him; for they will see that which had not been told
them, and they will understand that which they had not heard.

\hypertarget{the-deep-humiliation-of-the-servant-of-god-his-grave-sufferings-for-sinners-his-patient-death-and-the-promise-he-made-to-him}{%
\subsection{The deep humiliation of the Servant of God, his grave
sufferings for sinners, his patient death and the promise he made to
him}\label{the-deep-humiliation-of-the-servant-of-god-his-grave-sufferings-for-sinners-his-patient-death-and-the-promise-he-made-to-him}}

\hypertarget{section-52}{%
\section{53}\label{section-52}}

\bibleverse{1} Who has believed our message? To whom has Yahweh's arm
been revealed? \bibleverse{2} For he grew up before him as a tender
plant, and as a root out of dry ground. He has no good looks or majesty.
When we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.
\bibleverse{3} He was despised and rejected by men, a man of suffering
and acquainted with disease. He was despised as one from whom men hide
their face; and we didn't respect him. \bibleverse{4} Surely he has
borne our sickness and carried our suffering; yet we considered him
plagued, struck by God, and afflicted. \bibleverse{5} But he was pierced
for our transgressions. He was crushed for our iniquities. The
punishment that brought our peace was on him; and by his wounds we are
healed. \bibleverse{6} All we like sheep have gone astray. Everyone has
turned to his own way; and Yahweh has laid on him the iniquity of us
all. \bibleverse{7} He was oppressed, yet when he was afflicted he
didn't open his mouth. As a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and as a
sheep that before its shearers is silent, so he didn't open his mouth.
\bibleverse{8} He was taken away by oppression and judgment. As for his
generation, who considered that he was cut off out of the land of the
living and stricken for the disobedience of my people? \bibleverse{9}
They made his grave with the wicked, and with a rich man in his death,
although he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth.
\bibleverse{10} Yet it pleased Yahweh to bruise him. He has caused him
to suffer. When you make his soul an offering for sin, he will see his
offspring. He will prolong his days and Yahweh's pleasure will prosper
in his hand.

\hypertarget{god-confirms-the-servants-reward-for-his-vicarious-suffering}{%
\subsection{God confirms the servant's reward for his vicarious
suffering}\label{god-confirms-the-servants-reward-for-his-vicarious-suffering}}

\bibleverse{11} After the suffering of his soul, he will see the
light\footnote{\textbf{53:11} So read the Dead Sea Scrolls and
  Septuagint. Masoretic Text omits ``the light''.} and be satisfied. My
righteous servant will justify many by the knowledge of himself; and he
will bear their iniquities. \bibleverse{12} Therefore I will give him a
portion with the great. He will divide the plunder with the strong,
because he poured out his soul to death and was counted with the
transgressors; yet he bore the sins of many and made intercession for
the transgressors.

\hypertarget{the-gracious-acceptance-and-blessing-of-the-rich-boy-of-zion-the-pact-of-eternal-peace}{%
\subsection{The gracious acceptance and blessing of the rich boy of
Zion; the pact of eternal
peace}\label{the-gracious-acceptance-and-blessing-of-the-rich-boy-of-zion-the-pact-of-eternal-peace}}

\hypertarget{section-53}{%
\section{54}\label{section-53}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Sing, barren, you who didn't give birth! Break out into
singing, and cry aloud, you who didn't travail with child! For more are
the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife,''
says Yahweh. \bibleverse{2} ``Enlarge the place of your tent, and let
them stretch out the curtains of your habitations; don't spare; lengthen
your cords, and strengthen your stakes. \bibleverse{3} For you will
spread out on the right hand and on the left; and your offspring will
possess the nations and settle in desolate cities. \bibleverse{4}
``Don't be afraid, for you will not be ashamed. Don't be confounded, for
you will not be disappointed. For you will forget the shame of your
youth. You will remember the reproach of your widowhood no more.
\bibleverse{5} For your Maker is your husband; Yahweh of Armies is his
name. The Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer. He will be called the God
of the whole earth. \bibleverse{6} For Yahweh has called you as a wife
forsaken and grieved in spirit, even a wife of youth, when she is cast
off,'' says your God. \bibleverse{7} ``For a small moment I have
forsaken you, but I will gather you with great mercies. \bibleverse{8}
In overflowing wrath I hid my face from you for a moment, but with
everlasting loving kindness I will have mercy on you,'' says Yahweh your
Redeemer. \bibleverse{9} ``For this is like the waters of Noah to me;
for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah will no more go over the
earth, so I have sworn that I will not be angry with you, nor rebuke
you. \bibleverse{10} For the mountains may depart, and the hills be
removed, but my loving kindness will not depart from you, and my
covenant of peace will not be removed,'' says Yahweh who has mercy on
you.

\hypertarget{the-future-glory-and-secure-existence-of-the-city-of-god}{%
\subsection{The future glory and secure existence of the city of
God}\label{the-future-glory-and-secure-existence-of-the-city-of-god}}

\bibleverse{11} ``You afflicted, tossed with storms, and not comforted,
behold, I will set your stones in beautiful colors, and lay your
foundations with sapphires. \bibleverse{12} I will make your pinnacles
of rubies, your gates of sparkling jewels, and all your walls of
precious stones. \bibleverse{13} All your children will be taught by
Yahweh, and your children's peace will be great. \bibleverse{14} You
will be established in righteousness. You will be far from oppression,
for you will not be afraid, and far from terror, for it shall not come
near you. \bibleverse{15} Behold, they may gather together, but not by
me. Whoever gathers together against you will fall because of you.
\bibleverse{16} ``Behold, I have created the blacksmith who fans the
coals into flame, and forges a weapon for his work; and I have created
the destroyer to destroy. \bibleverse{17} No weapon that is formed
against you will prevail; and you will condemn every tongue that rises
against you in judgment. This is the heritage of Yahweh's servants, and
their righteousness is of me,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{urgent-admonition-to-the-people-to-seize-the-salvific-goods-promised-in-the-davidic-covenant-and-now-freely-offered}{%
\subsection{Urgent admonition to the people to seize the salvific goods
promised in the Davidic covenant and now freely
offered}\label{urgent-admonition-to-the-people-to-seize-the-salvific-goods-promised-in-the-davidic-covenant-and-now-freely-offered}}

\hypertarget{section-54}{%
\section{55}\label{section-54}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Hey! Come, everyone who thirsts, to the waters! Come,
he who has no money, buy, and eat! Yes, come, buy wine and milk without
money and without price. \bibleverse{2} Why do you spend money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which doesn't satisfy?
Listen diligently to me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in richness. \bibleverse{3} Turn your ear, and come to
me. Hear, and your soul will live. I will make an everlasting covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David. \bibleverse{4} Behold, I have
given him for a witness to the peoples, a leader and commander to the
peoples. \bibleverse{5} Behold, you shall call a nation that you don't
know; and a nation that didn't know you shall run to you, because of
Yahweh your God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he has glorified
you.''

\hypertarget{in-the-face-of-such-salvation-may-gods-great-plan-be-carried-out-for-israel-to-return-home-happy}{%
\subsection{In the face of such salvation, may God's great plan be
carried out for Israel to return home
happy!}\label{in-the-face-of-such-salvation-may-gods-great-plan-be-carried-out-for-israel-to-return-home-happy}}

\bibleverse{6} Seek Yahweh while he may be found. Call on him while he
is near. \bibleverse{7} Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts. Let him return to Yahweh, and he will have
mercy on him, to our God, for he will freely pardon. \bibleverse{8}
``For my thoughts are not your thoughts, and your ways are not my
ways,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{9} ``For as the heavens are higher than
the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than
your thoughts. \bibleverse{10} For as the rain comes down and the snow
from the sky, and doesn't return there, but waters the earth, and makes
it grow and bud, and gives seed to the sower and bread to the eater;
\bibleverse{11} so is my word that goes out of my mouth: it will not
return to me void, but it will accomplish that which I please, and it
will prosper in the thing I sent it to do. \bibleverse{12} For you shall
go out with joy, and be led out with peace. The mountains and the hills
will break out before you into singing; and all the trees of the fields
will clap their hands. \bibleverse{13} Instead of the thorn the cypress
tree will come up; and instead of the brier the myrtle tree will come
up. It will make a name for Yahweh, for an everlasting sign that will
not be cut off.''

\hypertarget{salvation-is-near-and-church-membership-is-possible-for-all-including-non-israelites}{%
\subsection{Salvation is near and church membership is possible for all,
including
non-Israelites}\label{salvation-is-near-and-church-membership-is-possible-for-all-including-non-israelites}}

\hypertarget{section-55}{%
\section{56}\label{section-55}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh says: ``Maintain justice and do what is right, for
my salvation is near and my righteousness will soon be revealed.
\bibleverse{2} Blessed is the man who does this, and the son of man who
holds it fast; who keeps the Sabbath without profaning it and keeps his
hand from doing any evil.'' \bibleverse{3} Let no foreigner who has
joined himself to Yahweh speak, saying, ``Yahweh will surely separate me
from his people.'' Do not let the eunuch say, ``Behold, I am a dry
tree.'' \bibleverse{4} For Yahweh says, ``To the eunuchs who keep my
Sabbaths, choose the things that please me, and hold fast to my
covenant, \bibleverse{5} I will give them in my house and within my
walls a memorial and a name better than of sons and of daughters. I will
give them an everlasting name that will not be cut off. \bibleverse{6}
Also the foreigners who join themselves to Yahweh to serve him, and to
love Yahweh's name, to be his servants, everyone who keeps the Sabbath
from profaning it, and holds fast my covenant, \bibleverse{7} I will
bring these to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of
prayer. Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on
my altar; for my house will be called a house of prayer for all
peoples.'' \bibleverse{8} The Lord Yahweh, who gathers the outcasts of
Israel, says, ``I will yet gather others to him, in addition to his own
who are gathered.''

\hypertarget{on-the-lack-of-scruples-and-selfishness-of-the-leaders-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{On the lack of scruples and selfishness of the leaders of
the
people}\label{on-the-lack-of-scruples-and-selfishness-of-the-leaders-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{9} All you animals of the field, come to devour, all you
animals in the forest. \bibleverse{10} His watchmen are blind. They are
all without knowledge. They are all mute dogs. They can't bark---
dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber. \bibleverse{11} Yes, the dogs
are greedy. They can never have enough. They are shepherds who can't
understand. They have all turned to their own way, each one to his gain,
from every quarter. \bibleverse{12} ``Come,'' they say, ``I will get
wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and tomorrow will be
as today, great beyond measure.''

\hypertarget{section-56}{%
\section{57}\label{section-56}}

\bibleverse{1} The righteous perish, and no one lays it to heart.
Merciful men are taken away, and no one considers that the righteous is
taken away from the evil. \bibleverse{2} He enters into peace. They rest
in their beds, each one who walks in his uprightness.

\hypertarget{on-the-idolatrous-and-indecent-activities-of-all-the-people}{%
\subsection{On the idolatrous and indecent activities of all the
people}\label{on-the-idolatrous-and-indecent-activities-of-all-the-people}}

\bibleverse{3} ``But draw near here, you sons of a sorceress, you
offspring of adulterers and prostitutes. \bibleverse{4} Whom do you
mock? Against whom do you make a wide mouth and stick out your tongue?
Aren't you children of disobedience and offspring of falsehood,
\bibleverse{5} you who inflame yourselves among the oaks, under every
green tree; who kill the children in the valleys, under the clefts of
the rocks? \bibleverse{6} Among the smooth stones of the valley is your
portion. They, they are your lot. You have even poured a drink offering
to them. You have offered an offering. Shall I be appeased for these
things? \bibleverse{7} On a high and lofty mountain you have set your
bed. You also went up there to offer sacrifice. \bibleverse{8} You have
set up your memorial behind the doors and the posts, for you have
exposed yourself to someone besides me, and have gone up. You have
enlarged your bed and made you a covenant with them. You loved what you
saw on their bed. \bibleverse{9} You went to the king with oil,
increased your perfumes, sent your ambassadors far off, and degraded
yourself even to Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{57:9} Sheol is the place of the
  dead.} \bibleverse{10} You were wearied with the length of your ways;
yet you didn't say, `It is in vain.' You found a reviving of your
strength; therefore you weren't faint. \bibleverse{11} ``Whom have you
dreaded and feared, so that you lie, and have not remembered me, nor
laid it to your heart? Haven't I held my peace for a long time, and you
don't fear me? \bibleverse{12} I will declare your righteousness; and as
for your works, they will not benefit you. \bibleverse{13} When you cry,
let those whom you have gathered deliver you, but the wind will take
them. A breath will carry them all away, but he who takes refuge in me
will possess the land, and will inherit my holy mountain.''

\hypertarget{new-promise-of-gods-grace-for-the-humble-pious-and-penitent}{%
\subsection{New promise of God's grace for the humble, pious and
penitent}\label{new-promise-of-gods-grace-for-the-humble-pious-and-penitent}}

\bibleverse{14} He will say, ``Build up, build up, prepare the way!
Remove the stumbling-block out of the way of my people.''
\bibleverse{15} For the high and lofty One who inhabits eternity, whose
name is Holy, says: ``I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
who is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite. \bibleverse{16} For I
will not contend forever, neither will I always be angry; for the spirit
would faint before me, and the souls whom I have made. \bibleverse{17} I
was angry because of the iniquity of his covetousness and struck him. I
hid myself and was angry; and he went on backsliding in the way of his
heart. \bibleverse{18} I have seen his ways, and will heal him. I will
lead him also, and restore comforts to him and to his mourners.
\bibleverse{19} I create the fruit of the lips: Peace, peace, to him who
is far off and to him who is near,'' says Yahweh; ``and I will heal
them.'' \bibleverse{20} But the wicked are like the troubled sea; for it
can't rest and its waters cast up mire and mud. \bibleverse{21} ``There
is no peace'', says my God, ``for the wicked.''

\hypertarget{the-vain-adoration-of-the-present-unworthy-of-external-fast}{%
\subsection{The vain adoration of the present; Unworthy of external
fast}\label{the-vain-adoration-of-the-present-unworthy-of-external-fast}}

\hypertarget{section-57}{%
\section{58}\label{section-57}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Cry aloud! Don't spare! Lift up your voice like a
trumpet! Declare to my people their disobedience, and to the house of
Jacob their sins. \bibleverse{2} Yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways. As a nation that did righteousness, and didn't forsake the
ordinance of their God, they ask of me righteous judgments. They delight
to draw near to God. \bibleverse{3} `Why have we fasted,' they say, `and
you don't see? Why have we afflicted our soul, and you don't notice?'
``Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and oppress all
your laborers. \bibleverse{4} Behold, you fast for strife and
contention, and to strike with the fist of wickedness. You don't fast
today so as to make your voice to be heard on high. \bibleverse{5} Is
this the fast that I have chosen? A day for a man to humble his soul? Is
it to bow down his head like a reed, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under himself? Will you call this a fast, and an acceptable day to
Yahweh?

\hypertarget{merciful-love-pleases-god}{%
\subsection{Merciful love pleases God}\label{merciful-love-pleases-god}}

\bibleverse{6} ``Isn't this the fast that I have chosen: to release the
bonds of wickedness, to undo the straps of the yoke, to let the
oppressed go free, and that you break every yoke? \bibleverse{7} Isn't
it to distribute your bread to the hungry, and that you bring the poor
who are cast out to your house? When you see the naked, that you cover
him; and that you not hide yourself from your own flesh? \bibleverse{8}
Then your light will break out as the morning, and your healing will
appear quickly; then your righteousness shall go before you, and
Yahweh's glory will be your rear guard. \bibleverse{9} Then you will
call, and Yahweh will answer. You will cry for help, and he will say,
`Here I am.' ``If you take away from among you the yoke, finger
pointing, and speaking wickedly; \bibleverse{10} and if you pour out
your soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then your light
will rise in darkness, and your obscurity will be as the noonday;
\bibleverse{11} and Yahweh will guide you continually, satisfy your soul
in dry places, and make your bones strong. You will be like a watered
garden, and like a spring of water whose waters don't fail.
\bibleverse{12} Those who will be of you will build the old waste
places. You will raise up the foundations of many generations. You will
be called Repairer of the Breach, Restorer of Paths with Dwellings.

\hypertarget{the-blessing-of-correct-sabbath-observance}{%
\subsection{The blessing of correct Sabbath
observance}\label{the-blessing-of-correct-sabbath-observance}}

\bibleverse{13} ``If you turn away your foot from the Sabbath, from
doing your pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, and
the holy of Yahweh honorable, and honor it, not doing your own ways, nor
finding your own pleasure, nor speaking your own words, \bibleverse{14}
then you will delight yourself in Yahweh, and I will make you to ride on
the high places of the earth, and I will feed you with the heritage of
Jacob your father;'' for Yahweh's mouth has spoken it.

\hypertarget{prophets-punishing-speech-on-general-sinfulness}{%
\subsection{Prophet's Punishing Speech on General
Sinfulness}\label{prophets-punishing-speech-on-general-sinfulness}}

\hypertarget{section-58}{%
\section{59}\label{section-58}}

\bibleverse{1} Behold, Yahweh's hand is not shortened, that it can't
save; nor his ear dull, that it can't hear. \bibleverse{2} But your
iniquities have separated you and your God, and your sins have hidden
his face from you, so that he will not hear. \bibleverse{3} For your
hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity. Your lips
have spoken lies. Your tongue mutters wickedness. \bibleverse{4} No one
sues in righteousness, and no one pleads in truth. They trust in vanity
and speak lies. They conceive mischief and give birth to iniquity.
\bibleverse{5} They hatch adders' eggs and weave the spider's web. He
who eats of their eggs dies; and that which is crushed breaks out into a
viper. \bibleverse{6} Their webs won't become garments. They won't cover
themselves with their works. Their works are works of iniquity, and acts
of violence are in their hands. \bibleverse{7} Their feet run to evil,
and they hurry to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of
iniquity. Desolation and destruction are in their paths. \bibleverse{8}
They don't know the way of peace; and there is no justice in their ways.
They have made crooked paths for themselves; whoever goes in them
doesn't know peace.

\hypertarget{des-volkes-bekenntnis-seiner-suxfcnden-und-seiner-ratlosigkeit}{%
\subsection{Des Volkes Bekenntnis seiner Sünden und seiner
Ratlosigkeit}\label{des-volkes-bekenntnis-seiner-suxfcnden-und-seiner-ratlosigkeit}}

\bibleverse{9} Therefore justice is far from us, and righteousness
doesn't overtake us. We look for light, but see darkness; for
brightness, but we walk in obscurity. \bibleverse{10} We grope for the
wall like the blind. Yes, we grope as those who have no eyes. We stumble
at noon as if it were twilight. Among those who are strong, we are like
dead men. \bibleverse{11} We all roar like bears and moan sadly like
doves. We look for justice, but there is none, for salvation, but it is
far off from us. \bibleverse{12} For our transgressions are multiplied
before you, and our sins testify against us; for our transgressions are
with us, and as for our iniquities, we know them: \bibleverse{13}
transgressing and denying Yahweh, and turning away from following our
God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the
heart words of falsehood. \bibleverse{14} Justice is turned away
backward, and righteousness stands far away; for truth has fallen in the
street, and uprightness can't enter.

\hypertarget{gods-saving-intervention-and-his-promise-of-salvation}{%
\subsection{God's saving intervention and His promise of
salvation}\label{gods-saving-intervention-and-his-promise-of-salvation}}

\bibleverse{15} Yes, truth is lacking; and he who departs from evil
makes himself a prey. Yahweh saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no justice. \bibleverse{16} He saw that there was no man, and
wondered that there was no intercessor. Therefore his own arm brought
salvation to him; and his righteousness sustained him. \bibleverse{17}
He put on righteousness as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation on
his head. He put on garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad
with zeal as a mantle. \bibleverse{18} According to their deeds, he will
repay as appropriate: wrath to his adversaries, recompense to his
enemies. He will repay the islands their due. \bibleverse{19} So they
will fear Yahweh's name from the west, and his glory from the rising of
the sun; for he will come as a rushing stream, which Yahweh's breath
drives. \bibleverse{20} ``A Redeemer will come to Zion, and to those who
turn from disobedience in Jacob,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{21} ``As for
me, this is my covenant with them,'' says Yahweh. ``My Spirit who is on
you, and my words which I have put in your mouth shall not depart out of
your mouth, nor out of the mouth of your offspring, nor out of the mouth
of your offspring's offspring,'' says Yahweh, ``from now on and
forever.''

\hypertarget{zion-eclipsed-by-the-light-of-god}{%
\subsection{Zion eclipsed by the light of
God}\label{zion-eclipsed-by-the-light-of-god}}

\hypertarget{section-59}{%
\section{60}\label{section-59}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Arise, shine; for your light has come, and Yahweh's
glory has risen on you! \bibleverse{2} For behold, darkness will cover
the earth, and thick darkness the peoples; but Yahweh will arise on you,
and his glory shall be seen on you. \bibleverse{3} Nations will come to
your light, and kings to the brightness of your rising.

\hypertarget{zion-as-a-gathering-place-for-her-children-and-the-treasures-of-the-world}{%
\subsection{Zion as a gathering place for her children and the treasures
of the
world}\label{zion-as-a-gathering-place-for-her-children-and-the-treasures-of-the-world}}

\bibleverse{4} ``Lift up your eyes all around, and see: they all gather
themselves together. They come to you. Your sons will come from far
away, and your daughters will be carried in arms. \bibleverse{5} Then
you shall see and be radiant, and your heart will thrill and be
enlarged; because the abundance of the sea will be turned to you. The
wealth of the nations will come to you. \bibleverse{6} A multitude of
camels will cover you, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah. All from
Sheba will come. They will bring gold and frankincense, and will
proclaim the praises of Yahweh. \bibleverse{7} All the flocks of Kedar
will be gathered together to you. The rams of Nebaioth will serve you.
They will be accepted as offerings on my altar; and I will beautify my
glorious house. \bibleverse{8} ``Who are these who fly as a cloud, and
as the doves to their windows? \bibleverse{9} Surely the islands will
wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring your sons from
far away, their silver and their gold with them, for the name of Yahweh
your God, and for the Holy One of Israel, because he has glorified you.

\hypertarget{zion-honored-and-graced-as-mistress-of-the-world}{%
\subsection{Zion honored and graced as mistress of the
world}\label{zion-honored-and-graced-as-mistress-of-the-world}}

\bibleverse{10} ``Foreigners will build up your walls, and their kings
will serve you; for in my wrath I struck you, but in my favor I have had
mercy on you. \bibleverse{11} Your gates also shall be open continually;
they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring to you the
wealth of the nations, and their kings led captive. \bibleverse{12} For
that nation and kingdom that will not serve you shall perish; yes, those
nations shall be utterly wasted. \bibleverse{13} ``The glory of Lebanon
shall come to you, the cypress tree, the pine, and the box tree
together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the
place of my feet glorious. \bibleverse{14} The sons of those who
afflicted you will come bowing to you; and all those who despised you
will bow themselves down at the soles of your feet. They will call you
Yahweh's City, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

\hypertarget{zion-the-glory-and-joy-of-the-peoples-as-the-peaceful-center-of-the-earth}{%
\subsection{Zion the glory and joy of the peoples as the peaceful center
of the
earth}\label{zion-the-glory-and-joy-of-the-peoples-as-the-peaceful-center-of-the-earth}}

\bibleverse{15} ``Whereas you have been forsaken and hated, so that no
one passed through you, I will make you an eternal excellency, a joy of
many generations. \bibleverse{16} You will also drink the milk of the
nations, and will nurse from royal breasts. Then you will know that I,
Yahweh, am your Savior, your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
\bibleverse{17} For bronze I will bring gold; for iron I will bring
silver; for wood, bronze, and for stones, iron. I will also make peace
your governor, and righteousness your ruler. \bibleverse{18} Violence
shall no more be heard in your land, nor desolation or destruction
within your borders; but you will call your walls Salvation, and your
gates Praise.

\hypertarget{zion-as-a-city-of-light-filled-with-god-is-flourishing-gloriously}{%
\subsection{Zion as a city of light filled with God is flourishing
gloriously}\label{zion-as-a-city-of-light-filled-with-god-is-flourishing-gloriously}}

\bibleverse{19} The sun will be no more your light by day, nor will the
brightness of the moon give light to you, but Yahweh will be your
everlasting light, and your God will be your glory. \bibleverse{20} Your
sun will not go down any more, nor will your moon withdraw itself; for
Yahweh will be your everlasting light, and the days of your mourning
will end. \bibleverse{21} Then your people will all be righteous. They
will inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my
hands, that I may be glorified. \bibleverse{22} The little one will
become a thousand, and the small one a strong nation. I, Yahweh, will do
this quickly in its time.''

\hypertarget{gods-messengers-consoling-address-to-his-afflicted-people}{%
\subsection{God's Messenger's consoling address to his afflicted
people}\label{gods-messengers-consoling-address-to-his-afflicted-people}}

\hypertarget{section-60}{%
\section{61}\label{section-60}}

\bibleverse{1} The Lord Yahweh's Spirit is on me, because Yahweh has
anointed me to preach good news to the humble. He has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and release to
those who are bound,\footnote{\textbf{61:1} LXX and DSS add: recovery of
  sight to the blind} \bibleverse{2} to proclaim the year of Yahweh's
favor and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all who mourn,
\bibleverse{3} to provide for those who mourn in Zion, to give to them a
garland for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise
for the spirit of heaviness, that they may be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of Yahweh, that he may be glorified.

\hypertarget{presentation-of-the-glory-promised-by-god}{%
\subsection{Presentation of the glory promised by
God}\label{presentation-of-the-glory-promised-by-god}}

\bibleverse{4} They will rebuild the old ruins. They will raise up the
former devastated places. They will repair the ruined cities that have
been devastated for many generations. \bibleverse{5} Strangers will
stand and feed your flocks. Foreigners will work your fields and your
vineyards. \bibleverse{6} But you will be called Yahweh's priests. Men
will call you the servants of our God. You will eat the wealth of the
nations. You will boast in their glory. \bibleverse{7} Instead of your
shame you will have double. Instead of dishonor, they will rejoice in
their portion. Therefore in their land they will possess double.
Everlasting joy will be to them. \bibleverse{8} ``For I, Yahweh, love
justice. I hate robbery and iniquity. I will give them their reward in
truth and I will make an everlasting covenant with them. \bibleverse{9}
Their offspring will be known among the nations, and their offspring
among the peoples. All who see them will acknowledge them, that they are
the offspring which Yahweh has blessed.''

\hypertarget{greetings-from-the-community-for-the-graceful-glorification}{%
\subsection{Greetings from the community for the graceful
glorification}\label{greetings-from-the-community-for-the-graceful-glorification}}

\bibleverse{10} I will greatly rejoice in Yahweh! My soul will be joyful
in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation. He has
covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decks himself
with a garland and as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.
\bibleverse{11} For as the earth produces its bud, and as the garden
causes the things that are sown in it to spring up, so the Lord Yahweh
will cause righteousness and praise to spring up before all the nations.

\hypertarget{god-proclaims-that-he-will-not-stop-until-the-height-of-zion-arrives}{%
\subsection{God proclaims that he will not stop until the height of Zion
arrives}\label{god-proclaims-that-he-will-not-stop-until-the-height-of-zion-arrives}}

\hypertarget{section-61}{%
\section{62}\label{section-61}}

\bibleverse{1} For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for
Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her righteousness shines out
like the dawn, and her salvation like a burning lamp. \bibleverse{2} The
nations will see your righteousness, and all kings your glory. You will
be called by a new name, which Yahweh's mouth will name.

\hypertarget{gods-advice-to-glorify-and-secure-his-city-will-inevitably-come-to-pass}{%
\subsection{God's advice to glorify and secure his city will inevitably
come to
pass}\label{gods-advice-to-glorify-and-secure-his-city-will-inevitably-come-to-pass}}

\bibleverse{3} You will also be a crown of beauty in Yahweh's hand, and
a royal diadem in your God's hand. \bibleverse{4} You will not be called
Forsaken any more, nor will your land be called Desolate any more; but
you will be called Hephzibah,\footnote{\textbf{62:4} Hephzibah means ``I
  delight in her''.} and your land Beulah;\footnote{\textbf{62:4} Beulah
  means ``married''} for Yahweh delights in you, and your land will be
married. \bibleverse{5} For as a young man marries a virgin, so your
sons will marry you. As a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, so your
God will rejoice over you.

\hypertarget{reminder-to-the-appointed-guards-over-jerusalem-not-to-leave-the-lord-alone-until-he-has-kept-his-promises}{%
\subsection{Reminder to the appointed guards over Jerusalem not to leave
the Lord alone until he has kept his
promises}\label{reminder-to-the-appointed-guards-over-jerusalem-not-to-leave-the-lord-alone-until-he-has-kept-his-promises}}

\bibleverse{6} I have set watchmen on your walls, Jerusalem. They will
never be silent day nor night. You who call on Yahweh, take no rest,
\bibleverse{7} and give him no rest until he establishes, and until he
makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth. \bibleverse{8} Yahweh has sworn
by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, ``Surely I will no
more give your grain to be food for your enemies, and foreigners will
not drink your new wine, for which you have labored, \bibleverse{9} but
those who have harvested it will eat it, and praise Yahweh. Those who
have gathered it will drink it in the courts of my sanctuary.''

\hypertarget{called-to-exodus-from-pagan-lands-to-the-city-of-god-destined-for-high-salvation}{%
\subsection{Called to exodus from pagan lands to the city of God
destined for high
salvation}\label{called-to-exodus-from-pagan-lands-to-the-city-of-god-destined-for-high-salvation}}

\bibleverse{10} Go through, go through the gates! Prepare the way of the
people! Build up, build up the highway! Gather out the stones! Lift up a
banner for the peoples. \bibleverse{11} Behold, Yahweh has proclaimed to
the end of the earth: ``Say to the daughter of Zion, `Behold, your
salvation comes! Behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense
before him!'\,'' \bibleverse{12} They will call them ``The Holy People,
Yahweh's Redeemed''. You will be called ``Sought Out, A City Not
Forsaken''.

\hypertarget{the-imminent-judgment-of-edom-and-other-godly-hostile-nations}{%
\subsection{The imminent judgment of Edom and other godly hostile
nations}\label{the-imminent-judgment-of-edom-and-other-godly-hostile-nations}}

\hypertarget{section-62}{%
\section{63}\label{section-62}}

\bibleverse{1} Who is this who comes from Edom, with dyed garments from
Bozrah? Who is this who is glorious in his clothing, marching in the
greatness of his strength? ``It is I who speak in righteousness, mighty
to save.'' \bibleverse{2} Why is your clothing red, and your garments
like him who treads in the wine vat? \bibleverse{3} ``I have trodden the
wine press alone. Of the peoples, no one was with me. Yes, I trod them
in my anger and trampled them in my wrath. Their lifeblood is sprinkled
on my garments, and I have stained all my clothing. \bibleverse{4} For
the day of vengeance was in my heart, and the year of my redeemed has
come. \bibleverse{5} I looked, and there was no one to help; and I
wondered that there was no one to uphold. Therefore my own arm brought
salvation to me. My own wrath upheld me. \bibleverse{6} I trod down the
peoples in my anger and made them drunk in my wrath. I poured their
lifeblood out on the earth.''

\hypertarget{looking-back-at-the-divine-benefits-shown-to-people-in-the-past}{%
\subsection{Looking back at the divine benefits shown to people in the
past}\label{looking-back-at-the-divine-benefits-shown-to-people-in-the-past}}

\bibleverse{7} I will tell of the loving kindnesses of Yahweh and the
praises of Yahweh, according to all that Yahweh has given to us, and the
great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he has given to them
according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving
kindnesses. \bibleverse{8} For he said, ``Surely, they are my people,
children who will not deal falsely;'' so he became their Savior.
\bibleverse{9} In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel
of his presence saved them. In his love and in his pity he redeemed
them. He bore them, and carried them all the days of old.

\hypertarget{yearning-of-the-people-rightly-punished-for-the-love-and-loyalty-of-the-old-god}{%
\subsection{Yearning of the people rightly punished for the love and
loyalty of the Old
God}\label{yearning-of-the-people-rightly-punished-for-the-love-and-loyalty-of-the-old-god}}

\bibleverse{10} But they rebelled and grieved his Holy Spirit. Therefore
he turned and became their enemy, and he himself fought against them.
\bibleverse{11} Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his
people, saying, ``Where is he who brought them up out of the sea with
the shepherds of his flock? Where is he who put his Holy Spirit among
them?'' \bibleverse{12} Who caused his glorious arm to be at Moses'
right hand? Who divided the waters before them, to make himself an
everlasting name? \bibleverse{13} Who led them through the depths, like
a horse in the wilderness, so that they didn't stumble? \bibleverse{14}
As the livestock that go down into the valley, Yahweh's Spirit caused
them to rest. So you led your people to make yourself a glorious name.

\hypertarget{please-ask-for-mercy-and-help-with-the-current-external-and-internal-misery}{%
\subsection{Please ask for mercy and help with the current external and
internal
misery}\label{please-ask-for-mercy-and-help-with-the-current-external-and-internal-misery}}

\bibleverse{15} Look down from heaven, and see from the habitation of
your holiness and of your glory. Where are your zeal and your mighty
acts? The yearning of your heart and your compassion is restrained
toward me. \bibleverse{16} For you are our Father, though Abraham
doesn't know us, and Israel does not acknowledge us. You, Yahweh, are
our Father. Our Redeemer from everlasting is your name. \bibleverse{17}
O Yahweh, why do you make us wander from your ways, and harden our heart
from your fear? Return for your servants' sake, the tribes of your
inheritance. \bibleverse{18} Your holy people possessed it but a little
while. Our adversaries have trodden down your sanctuary. \bibleverse{19}
We have become like those over whom you never ruled, like those who were
not called by your name.

\hypertarget{longing-for-the-full-revelation-of-the-terrible-power-of-god}{%
\subsection{Longing for the full revelation of the terrible power of
God}\label{longing-for-the-full-revelation-of-the-terrible-power-of-god}}

\hypertarget{section-63}{%
\section{64}\label{section-63}}

\bibleverse{1} Oh that you would tear the heavens, that you would come
down, that the mountains might quake at your presence--- \bibleverse{2}
as when fire kindles the brushwood, and the fire causes the water to
boil. Make your name known to your adversaries, that the nations may
tremble at your presence! \bibleverse{3} When you did awesome things
which we didn't look for, you came down, and the mountains quaked at
your presence. \bibleverse{4} For from of old men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, nor has the eye seen a God besides you, who works
for him who waits for him.

\hypertarget{humble-confession-of-guilt-and-request-for-a-new-grace}{%
\subsection{Humble confession of guilt and request for a new
grace}\label{humble-confession-of-guilt-and-request-for-a-new-grace}}

\bibleverse{5} You meet him who rejoices and does righteousness, those
who remember you in your ways. Behold, you were angry, and we sinned. We
have been in sin for a long time. Shall we be saved? \bibleverse{6} For
we have all become like one who is unclean, and all our righteousness is
like a polluted garment. We all fade like a leaf; and our iniquities,
like the wind, take us away. \bibleverse{7} There is no one who calls on
your name, who stirs himself up to take hold of you; for you have hidden
your face from us, and have consumed us by means of our iniquities.
\bibleverse{8} But now, Yahweh, you are our Father. We are the clay and
you our potter. We all are the work of your hand. \bibleverse{9} Don't
be furious, Yahweh. Don't remember iniquity forever. Look and see, we
beg you, we are all your people. \bibleverse{10} Your holy cities have
become a wilderness. Zion has become a wilderness, Jerusalem a
desolation. \bibleverse{11} Our holy and our beautiful house where our
fathers praised you is burned with fire. All our pleasant places are
laid waste. \bibleverse{12} Will you hold yourself back for these
things, Yahweh? Will you keep silent and punish us very severely?

\hypertarget{gods-wail-against-the-apostate-people-threat-of-punishment-for-apostates}{%
\subsection{Gods wail against the apostate people; Threat of punishment
for
apostates}\label{gods-wail-against-the-apostate-people-threat-of-punishment-for-apostates}}

\hypertarget{section-64}{%
\section{65}\label{section-64}}

\bibleverse{1} ``I am inquired of by those who didn't ask. I am found by
those who didn't seek me. I said, `See me, see me,' to a nation that was
not called by my name. \bibleverse{2} I have spread out my hands all day
to a rebellious people, who walk in a way that is not good, after their
own thoughts; \bibleverse{3} a people who provoke me to my face
continually, sacrificing in gardens, and burning incense on bricks;
\bibleverse{4} who sit among the graves, and spend nights in secret
places; who eat pig's meat, and broth of abominable things is in their
vessels; \bibleverse{5} who say, `Stay by yourself, don't come near to
me, for I am holier than you.' These are smoke in my nose, a fire that
burns all day. \bibleverse{6} ``Behold, it is written before me: I will
not keep silence, but will repay, yes, I will repay into their bosom
\bibleverse{7} your own iniquities and the iniquities of your fathers
together'', says Yahweh, ``who have burned incense on the mountains, and
blasphemed me on the hills. Therefore I will first measure their work
into their bosom.''

\hypertarget{announcement-of-divorce-between-faithful-servants-and-those-who-persist-in-apostasy-a-selection-must-be-saved}{%
\subsection{Announcement of divorce between faithful servants and those
who persist in apostasy; a selection must be
saved}\label{announcement-of-divorce-between-faithful-servants-and-those-who-persist-in-apostasy-a-selection-must-be-saved}}

\bibleverse{8} Yahweh says, ``As the new wine is found in the cluster,
and one says, `Don't destroy it, for a blessing is in it:' so I will do
for my servants' sake, that I may not destroy them all. \bibleverse{9} I
will bring offspring out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my
mountains. My chosen will inherit it, and my servants will dwell there.
\bibleverse{10} Sharon will be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor
a place for herds to lie down in, for my people who have sought me.
\bibleverse{11} ``But you who forsake Yahweh, who forget my holy
mountain, who prepare a table for Fortune, and who fill up mixed wine to
Destiny; \bibleverse{12} I will destine you to the sword, and you will
all bow down to the slaughter; because when I called, you didn't answer.
When I spoke, you didn't listen; but you did that which was evil in my
eyes, and chose that in which I didn't delight.''

\hypertarget{the-fate-of-those-who-worship-and-despise-god-the-exuberant-happiness-of-the-future-people-of-god}{%
\subsection{The fate of those who worship and despise God; the exuberant
happiness of the future people of
God}\label{the-fate-of-those-who-worship-and-despise-god-the-exuberant-happiness-of-the-future-people-of-god}}

\bibleverse{13} Therefore the Lord Yahweh says, ``Behold, my servants
will eat, but you will be hungry; behold, my servants will drink, but
you will be thirsty. Behold, my servants will rejoice, but you will be
disappointed. \bibleverse{14} Behold, my servants will sing for joy of
heart, but you will cry for sorrow of heart, and will wail for anguish
of spirit. \bibleverse{15} You will leave your name for a curse to my
chosen, and the Lord Yahweh will kill you. He will call his servants by
another name, \bibleverse{16} so that he who blesses himself in the
earth will bless himself in the God of truth; and he who swears in the
earth will swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are
forgotten, and because they are hidden from my eyes.

\hypertarget{the-blessedness-of-the-people-of-god-in-the-last-times}{%
\subsection{The blessedness of the people of God in the last
times}\label{the-blessedness-of-the-people-of-god-in-the-last-times}}

\bibleverse{17} ``For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and
the former things will not be remembered, nor come into mind.
\bibleverse{18} But be glad and rejoice forever in that which I create;
for, behold, I create Jerusalem to be a delight, and her people a joy.
\bibleverse{19} I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and delight in my people;
and the voice of weeping and the voice of crying will be heard in her no
more. \bibleverse{20} ``No more will there be an infant who only lives a
few days, nor an old man who has not filled his days; for the child will
die one hundred years old, and the sinner being one hundred years old
will be accursed. \bibleverse{21} They will build houses and inhabit
them. They will plant vineyards and eat their fruit. \bibleverse{22}
They will not build and another inhabit. They will not plant and another
eat; for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree, and my
chosen will long enjoy the work of their hands. \bibleverse{23} They
will not labor in vain nor give birth for calamity; for they are the
offspring of Yahweh's blessed and their descendants with them.
\bibleverse{24} It will happen that before they call, I will answer; and
while they are yet speaking, I will hear. \bibleverse{25} The wolf and
the lamb will feed together. The lion will eat straw like the ox. Dust
will be the serpent's food. They will not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain,'' says Yahweh.

\hypertarget{god-rejects-the-construction-of-temples-and-the-service-of-pagan-worshipers}{%
\subsection{God rejects the construction of temples and the service of
pagan
worshipers}\label{god-rejects-the-construction-of-temples-and-the-service-of-pagan-worshipers}}

\hypertarget{section-65}{%
\section{66}\label{section-65}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh says: ``Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
footstool. What kind of house will you build to me? Where will I rest?
\bibleverse{2} For my hand has made all these things, and so all these
things came to be,'' says Yahweh: ``but I will look to this man, even to
he who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and who trembles at my word.
\bibleverse{3} He who kills an ox is as he who kills a man; he who
sacrifices a lamb, as he who breaks a dog's neck; he who offers an
offering, as he who offers pig's blood; he who burns frankincense, as he
who blesses an idol. Yes, they have chosen their own ways, and their
soul delights in their abominations. \bibleverse{4} I also will choose
their delusions, and will bring their fears on them, because when I
called, no one answered; when I spoke, they didn't listen, but they did
that which was evil in my eyes, and chose that in which I didn't
delight.''

\hypertarget{word-of-threat-to-the-renegade-comrades}{%
\subsection{Word of threat to the renegade
comrades}\label{word-of-threat-to-the-renegade-comrades}}

\bibleverse{5} Hear Yahweh's word, you who tremble at his word: ``Your
brothers who hate you, who cast you out for my name's sake, have said,
`Let Yahweh be glorified, that we may see your joy;' but it is those who
shall be disappointed.

\hypertarget{fulfillment-of-salvation-for-jerusalem-in-the-end-times}{%
\subsection{Fulfillment of salvation for Jerusalem in the end
times}\label{fulfillment-of-salvation-for-jerusalem-in-the-end-times}}

\bibleverse{6} A voice of tumult from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of Yahweh that repays his enemies what they deserve.
\bibleverse{7} ``Before she travailed, she gave birth. Before her pain
came, she delivered a son. \bibleverse{8} Who has heard of such a thing?
Who has seen such things? Shall a land be born in one day? Shall a
nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she gave birth to
her children. \bibleverse{9} Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause
to be delivered?'' says Yahweh. ``Shall I who cause to give birth shut
the womb?'' says your God. \bibleverse{10} ``Rejoice with Jerusalem, and
be glad for her, all you who love her. Rejoice for joy with her, all you
who mourn over her; \bibleverse{11} that you may nurse and be satisfied
at the comforting breasts; that you may drink deeply, and be delighted
with the abundance of her glory.'' \bibleverse{12} For Yahweh says,
``Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the
nations like an overflowing stream, and you will nurse. You will be
carried on her side, and will be dandled on her knees. \bibleverse{13}
As one whom his mother comforts, so I will comfort you. You will be
comforted in Jerusalem.'' \bibleverse{14} You will see it, and your
heart shall rejoice, and your bones will flourish like the tender grass.
Yahweh's hand will be known among his servants; and he will have
indignation against his enemies.

\hypertarget{the-judgment-on-those-contaminated-by-pagan-beings-homecoming-of-the-scattered-people-of-god-eternal-torment-of-the-apostate}{%
\subsection{The judgment on those contaminated by pagan beings;
Homecoming of the scattered people of God; eternal torment of the
apostate}\label{the-judgment-on-those-contaminated-by-pagan-beings-homecoming-of-the-scattered-people-of-god-eternal-torment-of-the-apostate}}

\bibleverse{15} For, behold, Yahweh will come with fire, and his
chariots will be like the whirlwind; to render his anger with
fierceness, and his rebuke with flames of fire. \bibleverse{16} For
Yahweh will execute judgment by fire and by his sword on all flesh; and
those slain by Yahweh will be many. \bibleverse{17} ``Those who sanctify
themselves and purify themselves to go to the gardens, following one in
the middle, eating pig's meat, abominable things, and the mouse, they
shall come to an end together,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{18} ``For I
know their works and their thoughts. The time comes that I will gather
all nations and languages, and they will come, and will see my glory.
\bibleverse{19} ``I will set a sign among them, and I will send those
who escape of them to the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, who draw
the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to far-away islands, who have not heard my
fame, nor have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the
nations. \bibleverse{20} They shall bring all your brothers out of all
the nations for an offering to Yahweh, on horses, in chariots, in
litters, on mules, and on camels, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, says
Yahweh, as the children of Israel bring their offering in a clean vessel
into Yahweh's house. \bibleverse{21} Of them I will also select priests
and Levites,'' says Yahweh. \bibleverse{22} ``For as the new heavens and
the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me,'' says Yahweh,
``so your offspring and your name shall remain. \bibleverse{23} It shall
happen that from one new moon to another, and from one Sabbath to
another, all flesh will come to worship before me,'' says Yahweh.
\bibleverse{24} ``They will go out, and look at the dead bodies of the
men who have transgressed against me; for their worm will not die, nor
will their fire be quenched, and they will be loathsome to all
mankind.''
