\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Yahweh's\footnote{\textbf{1:1} ``Yahweh'' is God's proper
  Name, sometimes rendered ``LORD'' (all caps) in other translations.}
word that came to Micah of Morasheth in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{2} Hear, you peoples, all of you! Listen, O earth, and all
that is therein. Let the Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:2} The word translated
  ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} Yahweh be witness against you, the Lord from
his holy temple. \bibleverse{3} For behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:3}
  ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look at, take notice, observe, see,
  or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} Yahweh comes out of
his place, and will come down and tread on the high places of the earth.
\bibleverse{4} The mountains melt under him, and the valleys split apart
like wax before the fire, like waters that are poured down a steep
place. \bibleverse{5} ``All this is for the disobedience of Jacob, and
for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the disobedience of Jacob?
Isn't it Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? Aren't they
Jerusalem? \bibleverse{6} Therefore I will make Samaria like a rubble
heap of the field, like places for planting vineyards; and I will pour
down its stones into the valley, and I will uncover its foundations.
\bibleverse{7} All her idols will be beaten to pieces, all her temple
gifts will be burned with fire, and I will destroy all her images; for
of the hire of a prostitute has she gathered them, and to the hire of a
prostitute shall they return.'' \bibleverse{8} For this I will lament
and wail. I will go stripped and naked. I will howl like the jackals and
mourn like the ostriches. \bibleverse{9} For her wounds are incurable;
for it has come even to Judah. It reaches to the gate of my people, even
to Jerusalem. \bibleverse{10} Don't tell it in Gath. Don't weep at all.
At Beth Ophrah\footnote{\textbf{1:10} Beth Ophrah means literally
  ``House of Dust.''} I have rolled myself in the dust. \bibleverse{11}
Pass on, inhabitant of Shaphir, in nakedness and shame. The inhabitant
of Zaanan won't come out. The wailing of Beth Ezel will take from you
his protection. \bibleverse{12} For the inhabitant of Maroth waits
anxiously for good, because evil has come down from Yahweh to the gate
of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{13} Harness the chariot to the swift steed,
inhabitant of Lachish. She was the beginning of sin to the daughter of
Zion; For the transgressions of Israel were found in you.
\bibleverse{14} Therefore you will give a parting gift to Moresheth
Gath. The houses of Achzib will be a deceitful thing to the kings of
Israel. \bibleverse{15} I will yet bring a conqueror to you, inhabitants
of Mareshah. The glory of Israel will come to Adullam. \bibleverse{16}
Shave your heads, and cut off your hair for the children of your
delight. Enlarge your baldness like the vulture, for they have gone into
captivity from you!

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to those who devise iniquity and work evil on their
beds! When the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the
power of their hand. \bibleverse{2} They covet fields and seize them,
and houses, then take them away. They oppress a man and his house, even
a man and his heritage. \bibleverse{3} Therefore Yahweh says: ``Behold,
I am planning against these people a disaster, from which you will not
remove your necks, neither will you walk haughtily, for it is an evil
time. \bibleverse{4} In that day they will take up a parable against
you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, saying, `We are utterly
ruined! My people's possession is divided up. Indeed he takes it from me
and assigns our fields to traitors!'\,'' \bibleverse{5} Therefore you
will have no one who divides the land by lot in Yahweh's assembly.
\bibleverse{6} ``Don't prophesy!''---they prophesy--- ``Don't prophesy
about these things. Disgrace won't overtake us.'' \bibleverse{7} Shall
it be said, O house of Jacob, ``Is Yahweh's Spirit angry? Are these his
doings? Don't my words do good to him who walks blamelessly?''
\bibleverse{8} But lately my people have risen up as an enemy. You strip
the robe and clothing from those who pass by without a care, returning
from battle. \bibleverse{9} You drive the women of my people out from
their pleasant houses; from their young children you take away my
blessing forever. \bibleverse{10} Arise, and depart! For this is not
your resting place, because of uncleanness that destroys, even with a
grievous destruction. \bibleverse{11} If a man walking in a spirit of
falsehood lies, saying, ``I will prophesy to you of wine and of strong
drink,'' he would be the prophet of this people. \bibleverse{12} I will
surely assemble all of you, Jacob. I will surely gather the remnant of
Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as a flock in
the middle of their pasture. They will swarm with people.
\bibleverse{13} He who breaks open the way goes up before them. They
break through the gate, and go out. Their king passes on before them,
with Yahweh at their head.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} I said, ``Please listen, you heads of Jacob, and rulers
of the house of Israel: Isn't it for you to know justice? \bibleverse{2}
You who hate the good, and love the evil; who tear off their skin, and
their flesh from off their bones; \bibleverse{3} who also eat the flesh
of my people, and peel their skin from off them, and break their bones,
and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as meat within the
cauldron. \bibleverse{4} Then they will cry to Yahweh, but he will not
answer them. Yes, he will hide his face from them at that time, because
they made their deeds evil.''

\bibleverse{5} Yahweh says concerning the prophets who lead my people
astray---for those who feed their teeth, they proclaim, ``Peace!'' and
whoever doesn't provide for their mouths, they prepare war against him:
\bibleverse{6} ``Therefore night is over you, with no vision, and it is
dark to you, that you may not divine; and the sun will go down on the
prophets, and the day will be black over them. \bibleverse{7} The seers
shall be disappointed, and the diviners confounded. Yes, they shall all
cover their lips, for there is no answer from God.''\footnote{\textbf{3:7}
  The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``אֱלֹהִ֑ים'' (Elohim).}
\bibleverse{8} But as for me, I am full of power by Yahweh's Spirit, and
of judgment, and of might, to declare to Jacob his disobedience, and to
Israel his sin. \bibleverse{9} Please listen to this, you heads of the
house of Jacob, and rulers of the house of Israel, who abhor justice,
and pervert all equity, \bibleverse{10} who build up Zion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity. \bibleverse{11} Her leaders judge for
bribes, and her priests teach for a price, and her prophets of it tell
fortunes for money; yet they lean on Yahweh, and say, ``Isn't Yahweh
among us? No disaster will come on us.'' \bibleverse{12} Therefore Zion
for your sake will be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem will become
heaps of rubble, and the mountain of the temple like the high places of
a forest.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} But in the latter days, it will happen that the mountain
of Yahweh's temple will be established on the top of the mountains, and
it will be exalted above the hills; and peoples will stream to it.
\bibleverse{2} Many nations will go and say, ``Come! Let's go up to the
mountain of Yahweh, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.'' For the law will
go out of Zion, and Yahweh's word from Jerusalem; \bibleverse{3} and he
will judge between many peoples, and will decide concerning strong
nations afar off. They will beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruning hooks. Nation will not lift up sword against nation,
neither will they learn war any more. \bibleverse{4} But every man will
sit under his vine and under his fig tree. No one will make them afraid,
for the mouth of Yahweh of Armies has spoken. \bibleverse{5} Indeed all
the nations may walk in the name of their gods, but we will walk in the
name of Yahweh our God forever and ever. \bibleverse{6} ``In that day,''
says Yahweh, ``I will assemble that which is lame, and I will gather
that which is driven away, and that which I have afflicted;
\bibleverse{7} and I will make that which was lame a remnant, and that
which was cast far off a strong nation: and Yahweh will reign over them
on Mount Zion from then on, even forever.'' \bibleverse{8} You, tower of
the flock, the hill of the daughter of Zion, to you it will come. Yes,
the former dominion will come, the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{9} Now why do you cry out aloud? Is there no king in you?
Has your counselor perished, that pains have taken hold of you as of a
woman in travail? \bibleverse{10} Be in pain, and labor to give birth,
daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail; for now you will go out of
the city, and will dwell in the field, and will come even to Babylon.
There you will be rescued. There Yahweh will redeem you from the hand of
your enemies. \bibleverse{11} Now many nations have assembled against
you, that say, ``Let her be defiled, and let our eye gloat over Zion.''
\bibleverse{12} But they don't know the thoughts of Yahweh, neither do
they understand his counsel; for he has gathered them like the sheaves
to the threshing floor. \bibleverse{13} Arise and thresh, daughter of
Zion, for I will make your horn iron, and I will make your hoofs bronze.
You will beat in pieces many peoples. I will devote their gain to
Yahweh, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth. \# 5
\bibleverse{1} Now you shall gather yourself in troops, daughter of
troops. He has laid siege against us. They will strike the judge of
Israel with a rod on the cheek. \bibleverse{2} But you, Bethlehem
Ephrathah, being small among the clans of Judah, out of you one will
come out to me who is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings out are from
of old, from ancient times. \bibleverse{3} Therefore he will abandon
them until the time that she who is in labor gives birth. Then the rest
of his brothers will return to the children of Israel. \bibleverse{4} He
shall stand, and shall shepherd in the strength of Yahweh, in the
majesty of the name of Yahweh his God. They will live, for then he will
be great to the ends of the earth. \bibleverse{5} He will be our peace
when Assyria invades our land and when he marches through our
fortresses, then we will raise against him seven shepherds, and eight
leaders of men. \bibleverse{6} They will rule the land of Assyria with
the sword, and the land of Nimrod in its gates. He will deliver us from
the Assyrian, when he invades our land, and when he marches within our
border. \bibleverse{7} The remnant of Jacob will be among many peoples
like dew from Yahweh, like showers on the grass, that don't wait for man
nor wait for the sons of men. \bibleverse{8} The remnant of Jacob will
be among the nations, among many peoples, like a lion among the animals
of the forest, like a young lion among the flocks of sheep; who, if he
goes through, treads down and tears in pieces, and there is no one to
deliver. \bibleverse{9} Let your hand be lifted up above your
adversaries, and let all of your enemies be cut off. \bibleverse{10}
``It will happen in that day'', says Yahweh, ``that I will cut off your
horses from among you and will destroy your chariots. \bibleverse{11} I
will cut off the cities of your land and will tear down all your
strongholds. \bibleverse{12} I will destroy witchcraft from your hand.
You shall have no soothsayers. \bibleverse{13} I will cut off your
engraved images and your pillars from among you; and you shall no more
worship the work of your hands. \bibleverse{14} I will uproot your
Asherah poles from among you; and I will destroy your cities.
\bibleverse{15} I will execute vengeance in anger and wrath on the
nations that didn't listen.''

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{6}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Listen now to what Yahweh says: ``Arise, plead your case
before the mountains, and let the hills hear what you have to say.
\bibleverse{2} Hear, you mountains, Yahweh's indictment, and you
enduring foundations of the earth; for Yahweh has a case against his
people, and he will contend with Israel. \bibleverse{3} My people, what
have I done to you? How have I burdened you? Answer me! \bibleverse{4}
For I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage. I sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
\bibleverse{5} My people, remember now what Balak king of Moab devised,
and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim to Gilgal,
that you may know the righteous acts of Yahweh.'' \bibleverse{6} How
shall I come before Yahweh, and bow myself before the exalted God? Shall
I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old?
\bibleverse{7} Will Yahweh be pleased with thousands of rams? With tens
of thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my
disobedience? The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
\bibleverse{8} He has shown you, O man, what is good. What does Yahweh
require of you, but to act justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with your God? \bibleverse{9} Yahweh's voice calls to the city--- and
wisdom fears your name--- ``Listen to the rod, and he who appointed it.
\bibleverse{10} Are there yet treasures of wickedness in the house of
the wicked, and a short ephah\footnote{\textbf{6:10} An ephah is a
  measure of volume (about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel), and a
  short ephah is made smaller than a full ephah for the purpose of
  cheating customers.} that is accursed? \bibleverse{11} Shall I
tolerate dishonest scales, and a bag of deceitful weights?
\bibleverse{12} Her rich men are full of violence, her inhabitants speak
lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their speech. \bibleverse{13}
Therefore I also have struck you with a grievous wound. I have made you
desolate because of your sins. \bibleverse{14} You shall eat, but not be
satisfied. Your hunger will be within you. You will store up, but not
save, and that which you save I will give up to the sword.
\bibleverse{15} You will sow, but won't reap. You will tread the olives,
but won't anoint yourself with oil; and crush grapes, but won't drink
the wine. \bibleverse{16} For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the
works of Ahab's house. You walk in their counsels, that I may make you a
ruin, and your inhabitants a hissing. You will bear the reproach of my
people.''

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{7}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Misery is mine! Indeed, I am like one who gathers the
summer fruits, as gleanings of the vineyard. There is no cluster of
grapes to eat. My soul desires to eat the early fig.~\bibleverse{2} The
godly man has perished out of the earth, and there is no one upright
among men. They all lie in wait for blood; every man hunts his brother
with a net. \bibleverse{3} Their hands are on that which is evil to do
it diligently. The ruler and judge ask for a bribe. The powerful man
dictates the evil desire of his soul. Thus they conspire together.
\bibleverse{4} The best of them is like a brier. The most upright is
worse than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen, even your
visitation, has come; now is the time of their confusion. \bibleverse{5}
Don't trust in a neighbor. Don't put confidence in a friend. With the
woman lying in your embrace, be careful of the words of your mouth!
\bibleverse{6} For the son dishonors the father, the daughter rises up
against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a
man's enemies are the men of his own house. \bibleverse{7} But as for
me, I will look to Yahweh. I will wait for the God of my salvation. My
God will hear me. \bibleverse{8} Don't rejoice against me, my enemy.
When I fall, I will arise. When I sit in darkness, Yahweh will be a
light to me. \bibleverse{9} I will bear the indignation of Yahweh,
because I have sinned against him, until he pleads my case and executes
judgment for me. He will bring me out to the light. I will see his
righteousness. \bibleverse{10} Then my enemy will see it, and shame will
cover her who said to me, ``Where is Yahweh your God?'' My eyes will see
her. Now she will be trodden down like the mire of the streets.
\bibleverse{11} A day to build your walls! In that day, he will extend
your boundary. \bibleverse{12} In that day they will come to you from
Assyria and the cities of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and
from sea to sea, and mountain to mountain. \bibleverse{13} Yet the land
will be desolate because of those who dwell therein, for the fruit of
their doings. \bibleverse{14} Shepherd your people with your staff, the
flock of your heritage, who dwell by themselves in a forest. Let them
feed in the middle of fertile pasture land, in Bashan and Gilead, as in
the days of old. \bibleverse{15} ``As in the days of your coming out of
the land of Egypt, I will show them marvelous things.'' \bibleverse{16}
The nations will see and be ashamed of all their might. They will lay
their hand on their mouth. Their ears will be deaf. \bibleverse{17} They
will lick the dust like a serpent. Like crawling things of the earth,
they will come trembling out of their dens. They will come with fear to
Yahweh our God, and will be afraid because of you. \bibleverse{18} Who
is a God like you, who pardons iniquity, and passes over the
disobedience of the remnant of his heritage? He doesn't retain his anger
forever, because he delights in loving kindness. \bibleverse{19} He will
again have compassion on us. He will tread our iniquities under foot.
You will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea. \bibleverse{20}
You will give truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as you have sworn to
our fathers from the days of old.
