\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The revelation which Habakkuk the prophet saw.
\bibleverse{2} Yahweh,\footnote{\textbf{1:2} ``Yahweh'' is God's proper
  Name, sometimes rendered ``LORD'' (all caps) in other translations.}
how long will I cry, and you will not hear? I cry out to you
``Violence!'' and will you not save? \bibleverse{3} Why do you show me
iniquity, and look at perversity? For destruction and violence are
before me. There is strife, and contention rises up. \bibleverse{4}
Therefore the law is paralyzed, and justice never prevails; for the
wicked surround the righteous; therefore justice comes out perverted.

\bibleverse{5} ``Look among the nations, watch, and wonder marvelously;
for I am working a work in your days which you will not believe though
it is told you. \bibleverse{6} For, behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:6}
  ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look at, take notice, observe, see,
  or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} I am raising up the
Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation who march through the width of
the earth, to possess dwelling places that are not theirs.
\bibleverse{7} They are feared and dreaded. Their judgment and their
dignity proceed from themselves. \bibleverse{8} Their horses also are
swifter than leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves.
Their horsemen press proudly on. Yes, their horsemen come from afar.
They fly as an eagle that hurries to devour. \bibleverse{9} All of them
come for violence. Their hordes face forward. They gather prisoners like
sand. \bibleverse{10} Yes, they scoff at kings, and princes are a
derision to them. They laugh at every stronghold, for they build up an
earthen ramp and take it. \bibleverse{11} Then they sweep by like the
wind and go on. They are indeed guilty, whose strength is their god.''

\bibleverse{12} Aren't you from everlasting, Yahweh my God,\footnote{\textbf{1:12}
  The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``אֱלֹהִ֑ים'' (Elohim).} my Holy
One? We will not die. Yahweh, you have appointed them for judgment. You,
Rock, have established him to punish. \bibleverse{13} You who have purer
eyes than to see evil, and who cannot look on perversity, why do you
tolerate those who deal treacherously and keep silent when the wicked
swallows up the man who is more righteous than he, \bibleverse{14} and
make men like the fish of the sea, like the creeping things that have no
ruler over them? \bibleverse{15} He takes up all of them with the hook.
He catches them in his net and gathers them in his dragnet. Therefore he
rejoices and is glad. \bibleverse{16} Therefore he sacrifices to his net
and burns incense to his dragnet, because by them his life is luxurious
and his food is good. \bibleverse{17} Will he therefore continually
empty his net, and kill the nations without mercy?

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} I will stand at my watch and set myself on the ramparts,
and will look out to see what he will say to me, and what I will answer
concerning my complaint.

\bibleverse{2} Yahweh answered me, ``Write the vision, and make it plain
on tablets, that he who runs may read it. \bibleverse{3} For the vision
is yet for the appointed time, and it hurries toward the end, and won't
prove false. Though it takes time, wait for it, because it will surely
come. It won't delay. \bibleverse{4} Behold, his soul is puffed up. It
is not upright in him, but the righteous will live by his faith.
\bibleverse{5} Yes, moreover, wine is treacherous: an arrogant man who
doesn't stay at home, who enlarges his desire as Sheol;\footnote{\textbf{2:5}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} he is like death and can't be
satisfied, but gathers to himself all nations and heaps to himself all
peoples.

\bibleverse{6} Won't all these take up a parable against him, and a
taunting proverb against him, and say, `Woe to him who increases that
which is not his, and who enriches himself by extortion! How long?'
\bibleverse{7} Won't your debtors rise up suddenly, and wake up those
who make you tremble, and you will be their victim? \bibleverse{8}
Because you have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples
will plunder you because of men's blood, and for the violence done to
the land, to the city and to all who dwell in it.

\bibleverse{9} Woe to him who gets an evil gain for his house, that he
may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the hand of
evil! \bibleverse{10} You have devised shame to your house by cutting
off many peoples, and have sinned against your soul. \bibleverse{11} For
the stone will cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the woodwork
will answer it.

\bibleverse{12} Woe to him who builds a town with blood, and establishes
a city by iniquity! \bibleverse{13} Behold, isn't it from Yahweh of
Armies that the peoples labor for the fire, and the nations weary
themselves for vanity? \bibleverse{14} For the earth will be filled with
the knowledge of Yahweh's glory, as the waters cover the sea.

\bibleverse{15} ``Woe to him who gives his neighbor drink, pouring your
inflaming wine until they are drunk, so that you may gaze at their naked
bodies! \bibleverse{16} You are filled with shame, and not glory. You
will also drink and be exposed! The cup of Yahweh's right hand will come
around to you, and disgrace will cover your glory. \bibleverse{17} For
the violence done to Lebanon will overwhelm you, and the destruction of
the animals will terrify you, because of men's blood and for the
violence done to the land, to every city and to those who dwell in them.

\bibleverse{18} ``What value does the engraved image have, that its
maker has engraved it; the molten image, even the teacher of lies, that
he who fashions its form trusts in it, to make mute idols?
\bibleverse{19} Woe to him who says to the wood, `Awake!' or to the mute
stone, `Arise!' Shall this teach? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and
silver, and there is no breath at all within it. \bibleverse{20} But
Yahweh is in his holy temple. Let all the earth be silent before him!''

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} A prayer of Habakkuk, the prophet, set to victorious
music. \bibleverse{2} Yahweh, I have heard of your fame. I stand in awe
of your deeds, Yahweh. Renew your work in the middle of the years. In
the middle of the years make it known. In wrath, you remember mercy.
\bibleverse{3} God came from Teman, the Holy One from Mount Paran.
Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and his praise filled the earth.
\bibleverse{4} His splendor is like the sunrise. Rays shine from his
hand, where his power is hidden. \bibleverse{5} Plague went before him,
and pestilence followed his feet. \bibleverse{6} He stood, and shook the
earth. He looked, and made the nations tremble. The ancient mountains
were crumbled. The age-old hills collapsed. His ways are eternal.
\bibleverse{7} I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction. The dwellings of
the land of Midian trembled. \bibleverse{8} Was Yahweh displeased with
the rivers? Was your anger against the rivers, or your wrath against the
sea, that you rode on your horses, on your chariots of salvation?
\bibleverse{9} You uncovered your bow. You called for your sworn arrows.
Selah. You split the earth with rivers. \bibleverse{10} The mountains
saw you, and were afraid. The storm of waters passed by. The deep roared
and lifted up its hands on high. \bibleverse{11} The sun and moon stood
still in the sky at the light of your arrows as they went, at the
shining of your glittering spear. \bibleverse{12} You marched through
the land in wrath. You threshed the nations in anger. \bibleverse{13}
You went out for the salvation of your people, for the salvation of your
anointed. You crushed the head of the land of wickedness. You stripped
them head to foot. Selah. \bibleverse{14} You pierced the heads of his
warriors with their own spears. They came as a whirlwind to scatter me,
gloating as if to devour the wretched in secret. \bibleverse{15} You
trampled the sea with your horses, churning mighty waters.
\bibleverse{16} I heard, and my body trembled. My lips quivered at the
voice. Rottenness enters into my bones, and I tremble in my place
because I must wait quietly for the day of trouble, for the coming up of
the people who invade us. \bibleverse{17} For even though the fig tree
doesn't flourish, nor fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive
fails, the fields yield no food, the flocks are cut off from the fold,
and there is no herd in the stalls, \bibleverse{18} yet I will rejoice
in Yahweh. I will be joyful in the God of my salvation! \bibleverse{19}
Yahweh, the Lord,\footnote{\textbf{3:19} The word translated ``Lord'' is
  ``Adonai.''} is my strength. He makes my feet like deer's feet, and
enables me to go in high places.

For the music director, on my stringed instruments.
