\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} These are the words of the book which Baruch the son of
Nerias, the son of Maaseas, the son of Sedekias, the son of Asadias, the
son of Helkias, wrote in Babylon, \bibleverse{2} in the fifth year, in
the seventh day of the month, at the time when the Chaldeans took
Jerusalem and burned it with fire. \bibleverse{3} Baruch read the words
of this book in the hearing of Jechonias the son of Joakim king of
Judah, and in the hearing of all the people who came to hear the book,
\bibleverse{4} and in the hearing of the mighty men, and of the kings'
sons, and in the hearing of the elders, and in the hearing of all the
people, from the least to the greatest, even of all those who lived at
Babylon by the river Sud. \bibleverse{5} Then they wept,
fasted,\footnote{\textbf{1:5} Another reading is, and vowed vows.} and
prayed before the Lord. \bibleverse{6} They also made a collection of
money according to every man's ability; \bibleverse{7} and they sent it
to Jerusalem to Joakim the high priest, the son of Helkias, the son of
Salom, and to the priests and to all the people who were found with him
at Jerusalem, \bibleverse{8} at the same time when he took the vessels
of the house of the Lord, that had been carried out of the temple, to
return them into the land of Judah, the tenth day of Sivan---silver
vessels which Sedekias the son of Josias king of Judah had made,
\bibleverse{9} after Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had carried away
Jechonias, the princes, the captives, the mighty men, and the people of
the land from Jerusalem, and brought them to Babylon.

\bibleverse{10} And they said: Behold, we have sent you money; therefore
buy with the money burnt offerings, sin offerings, and incense, and
prepare an oblation, and offer upon the altar of the Lord our God;
\bibleverse{11} and pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon,
and for the life of Baltasar his son, that their days may be\footnote{\textbf{1:11}
  See Deuteronomy 11:21.} as the days of heaven above the earth.
\bibleverse{12} The Lord will give us strength and light to our eyes. We
will live under the shadow of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon and under
the shadow of Baltasar his son, and we shall serve them many days, and
find favor in their sight. \bibleverse{13} Pray for us also to the Lord
our God, for we have sinned against the Lord our God. To this day the
wrath of the Lord and his indignation is not turned from us.
\bibleverse{14} You shall read this book which we have sent to you, to
make confession in the house of the Lord upon the day of the feast and
on the days of the solemn assembly.

\bibleverse{15} You shall say: To the Lord our God belongs
righteousness, but to us confusion of face, as at this day---to the men
of Judah, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, \bibleverse{16} to our kings,
to our princes, to our priests, to our prophets, and to our fathers,
\bibleverse{17} because we have sinned before the Lord. \bibleverse{18}
We have disobeyed him and have not listened to the voice of the Lord our
God, to walk in the commandments of the Lord that he has set before us.
\bibleverse{19} Since the day that the Lord brought our fathers out of
the land of Egypt to this present day, we have been disobedient to the
Lord our God, and we have been negligent in not listening to his voice.
\bibleverse{20} Therefore the plagues have clung to us, along with the
curse which the Lord declared through Moses his servant in the day that
he brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt to give us a land that
flows with milk and honey, as at this day. \bibleverse{21} Nevertheless
we didn't listen to the voice of the Lord our God, according to all the
words of the prophets whom he sent to us, \bibleverse{22} but we each
walked in the imagination of his own wicked heart, to serve strange gods
and to do what is evil in the sight of the Lord our God.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} Therefore the Lord has made good his word which he
pronounced against us, and against our judges who judged Israel, and
against our kings, and against our princes, and against the men of
Israel and Judah, \bibleverse{2} to bring upon us great plagues such as
never happened before under the whole heaven,\footnote{\textbf{2:2}
  Another reading is, even as he has done.} as it came to pass in
Jerusalem, according to the things that are written in the law of Moses,
\bibleverse{3} that we should each eat the flesh of our own son, and
each eat the flesh of our own daughter. \bibleverse{4} Moreover he has
given them to be in subjection to all the kingdoms that are around us,
to be a reproach and a desolation among all the people around us, where
the Lord has scattered them. \bibleverse{5} Thus they were cast down and
not exalted, because we sinned against the Lord our God in not listening
to his voice. \bibleverse{6} To the Lord our God belongs righteousness,
but to us and to our fathers confusion of face, as at this day.
\bibleverse{7} All these plagues have come upon us which the Lord has
pronounced against us. \bibleverse{8} Yet have we not entreated the
favor of the Lord by everyone turning from the thoughts of his wicked
heart. \bibleverse{9} Therefore the Lord has kept watch over the
plagues. The Lord has brought them upon us, for the Lord is righteous in
all his works which he has commanded us. \bibleverse{10} Yet we have not
listened to his voice, to walk in the commandments of the Lord that he
has set before us.

\bibleverse{11} And now, O Lord, you God of Israel who have brought your
people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, with signs, with
wonders, with great power, and with a high arm, and have gotten yourself
a name, as at this day: \bibleverse{12} O Lord our God, we have sinned.
We have been ungodly. We have done wrong in all your ordinances.
\bibleverse{13} Let your wrath turn from us, for we are but a few left
among the heathen where you have scattered us. \bibleverse{14} Hear our
prayer, O Lord, and our petition, and deliver us for your own sake. Give
us favor in the sight of those who have led us away captive,
\bibleverse{15} that all the earth may know that you are the Lord our
God, because Israel and his posterity is called by your name.
\bibleverse{16} O Lord, look down from your holy house and consider us.
Incline your ear, O Lord, and hear. \bibleverse{17} Open your eyes, and
see; for the dead that are in Hades, whose breath is taken from their
bodies, will give to the Lord neither glory nor righteousness;
\bibleverse{18} but the soul who is greatly vexed, who goes stooping and
feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul, will declare your
glory and righteousness, O Lord.

\bibleverse{19} For we do not present our supplication before you, O
Lord our God, for the righteousness of our fathers and of our kings.
\bibleverse{20} For you have sent your wrath and your indignation upon
us, as you have spoken by your servants the prophets, saying,
\bibleverse{21} ``The Lord says, `Bow your shoulders to serve the king
of Babylon, and remain in the land that I gave to your fathers.
\bibleverse{22} But if you won't hear the voice of the Lord to serve the
king of Babylon, \bibleverse{23} I will cause to cease out of the cities
of Judah and from the region near Jerusalem the voice of mirth, the
voice of gladness, voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.
The whole land will be desolate without inhabitant.'\,'' \bibleverse{24}
But we wouldn't listen to your voice, to serve the king of Babylon.
Therefore you have made good your words that you spoke by your servants
the prophets, that the bones of our kings and the bones of our fathers
would be taken out of their places. \bibleverse{25} Behold, they are
cast out to the heat by day and to the frost by night. They died in
great miseries by famine, by sword, and by\footnote{\textbf{2:25} See
  Jeremiah 32:36.} pestilence. \bibleverse{26} You have made the house
that is called by your name as it is today because of the wickedness of
the house of Israel and the house of Judah.

\bibleverse{27} Yet, O Lord our God, you have dealt with us after all
your kindness and according to all your great mercy, \bibleverse{28} as
you spoke by your servant Moses in the day when you commanded him to
write your law in the presence of the children of Israel, saying,
\bibleverse{29} ``If you won't hear my voice, surely this very great
multitude will be turned into a small number among the nations where I
will scatter them. \bibleverse{30} For I know that they will not hear
me, because they are a stiff-necked people; but in the land of their
captivity they will take it to heart, \bibleverse{31} and will know that
I am the Lord their God. I will give them a heart and ears to hear.
\bibleverse{32} Then they will praise me in the land of their captivity,
and think about my name, \bibleverse{33} and will return from their
stiff neck and from their wicked deeds; for they will remember the way
of their fathers who sinned before the Lord. \bibleverse{34} I will
bring them again into the land which I promised to their fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and they will rule over it. I will
increase them, and they won't be diminished. \bibleverse{35} And I will
make an everlasting covenant with them to be their God, and they will be
my people. I will no more remove my people Israel out of the land that I
have given them.''

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} O Lord Almighty, you God of Israel, the soul in anguish
and the troubled spirit cries to you. \bibleverse{2} Hear, O Lord, and
have mercy; for you are a merciful God. Yes, have mercy upon us, because
we have sinned before you. \bibleverse{3} For you are enthroned forever,
and we keep perishing. \bibleverse{4} O Lord Almighty, you God of
Israel, hear now the prayer of the dead Israelites, and of the children
of those who were sinners before you, who didn't listen to the voice of
you their God; because of this, these plagues cling to us.
\bibleverse{5} Don't remember the iniquities of our fathers, but
remember your power and your name at this time. \bibleverse{6} For you
are the Lord our God, and we will praise you, O Lord. \bibleverse{7} For
this cause, you have put your fear in our hearts, to the intent that we
should call upon your name. We will praise you in our captivity, for we
have called to mind all the iniquity of our fathers who sinned before
you. \bibleverse{8} Behold, we are yet this day in our captivity where
you have scattered us, for a reproach and a curse, and to be subject to
penalty according to all the iniquities of our fathers who departed from
the Lord our God.

\bibleverse{9} Hear, O Israel, the commandments of life! Give ear to
understand wisdom! \bibleverse{10} How is it, O Israel, that you are in
your enemies' land, that you have become old in a strange country, that
you are defiled with the dead, \bibleverse{11} that you are counted with
those who are in Hades? \bibleverse{12} You have forsaken the fountain
of wisdom. \bibleverse{13} If you had walked in the way of God, you
would have dwelled in peace forever. \bibleverse{14} Learn where there
is wisdom, where there is strength, and where there is understanding,
that you may also know where there is length of days and life, where
there is the light of the eyes and peace. \bibleverse{15} Who has found
out her place? Who has come into her treasuries? \bibleverse{16} Where
are the princes of the heathen, and those who ruled the beasts that are
on the earth, \bibleverse{17} those who had their pastime with the fowls
of the air, and those who hoarded up silver and gold, in which people
trust, and of their getting there is no end? \bibleverse{18} For those
who diligently sought silver, and were so anxious, and whose works are
past finding out, \bibleverse{19} they have vanished and gone down to
Hades, and others have come up in their place.

\bibleverse{20} Younger men have seen the light and lived upon the
earth, but they haven't known the way of knowledge, \bibleverse{21} nor
understood its paths. Their children haven't embraced it. They are far
off from their way. \bibleverse{22} It has not been heard of in Canaan,
neither has it been seen in Teman. \bibleverse{23} The sons also of Agar
who seek understanding, which are in the land, the merchants of Merran
and Teman, and the authors of fables, and the searchers out of
understanding---none of these have known the way of wisdom or remembered
her paths.

\bibleverse{24} O Israel, how great is the house of God! How large is
the place of his possession! \bibleverse{25} It is great and has no end.
It is high and unmeasurable. \bibleverse{26} Giants were born that were
famous of old, great of stature, and expert in war. \bibleverse{27} God
didn't choose these, nor did he give the way of knowledge to them,
\bibleverse{28} so they perished, because they had no wisdom. They
perished through their own foolishness. \bibleverse{29} Who has gone up
into heaven, taken her, and brought her down from the clouds?
\bibleverse{30} Who has gone over the sea, found her, and will bring her
for choice gold? \bibleverse{31} There is no one who knows her way, nor
any who comprehend her path. \bibleverse{32} But he that knows all
things knows her, he found her out with his understanding. He who
prepared the earth for all time has filled it with four-footed beasts.
\bibleverse{33} It is he who sends forth the light, and it goes. He
called it, and it obeyed him with fear. \bibleverse{34} The stars shone
in their watches, and were glad. When he called them, they said, ``Here
we are.'' They shone with gladness to him who made them. \bibleverse{35}
This is our God. No other can be compared to him. \bibleverse{36} He has
found out all the way of knowledge, and has given it to Jacob his
servant and to Israel who is loved by him. \bibleverse{37} Afterward she
appeared upon earth, and lived with men.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} This is the book of God's commandments and the law that
endures forever. All those who hold it fast will live, but those who
leave it will die. \bibleverse{2} Turn, O Jacob, and take hold of it.
Walk toward the shining of its light. \bibleverse{3} Don't give your
glory to another, nor the things that are to your advantage to a foreign
nation. \bibleverse{4} O Israel, we are happy; for the things that are
pleasing to God are made known to us.

\bibleverse{5} Be of good cheer, my people, the memorial of Israel.
\bibleverse{6} You were not sold to the nations for destruction, but
because you moved God to wrath, you were delivered to your adversaries.
\bibleverse{7} For you provoked him who made you by sacrificing to
demons and not to God. \bibleverse{8} You forgot the everlasting God who
brought you up. You also grieved Jerusalem, who nursed you.
\bibleverse{9} For she saw the wrath that came upon you from God, and
said, Listen, you who dwell near Zion; for God has brought upon me great
mourning. \bibleverse{10} For I have seen the captivity of my sons and
daughters, which the Everlasting has brought upon them. \bibleverse{11}
For with joy I nourished them, but sent them away with weeping and
mourning. \bibleverse{12} Let no man rejoice over me, a widow and
forsaken by many. For the sins of my children, I am left desolate,
because they turned away from the law of God \bibleverse{13} and had no
regard for his statutes. They didn't walk in the ways of God's
commandments or tread in the paths of discipline in his righteousness.
\bibleverse{14} Let those who dwell near Zion come and remember the
captivity of my sons and daughters, which the Everlasting has brought
upon them. \bibleverse{15} For he has brought a nation upon them from
afar, a shameless nation with a strange language, who didn't respect old
men or pity children. \bibleverse{16} They have carried away the dear
beloved sons of the widow, and left her who was alone desolate of her
daughters.

\bibleverse{17} But I---how can I help you? \bibleverse{18} For he who
brought these calamities upon you will deliver you from the hand of your
enemies. \bibleverse{19} Go your way, O my children. Go your way, for I
am left desolate. \bibleverse{20} I have put off the garment of peace,
and put on the sackcloth of my petition. I will cry to the Everlasting
as long as I live.

\bibleverse{21} Take courage, my children. Cry to God, and he will
deliver you from the power and hand of the enemies. \bibleverse{22} For
I have trusted in the Everlasting, that he will save you; and joy has
come to me from the Holy One, because of the mercy that will soon come
to you from your Everlasting Savior. \bibleverse{23} For I sent you out
with mourning and weeping, but God will give you to me again with joy
and gladness forever. \bibleverse{24} For as now those who dwell near
Zion have seen your captivity, so they will shortly see your salvation
from our God which will come upon you with great glory and brightness of
the Everlasting. \bibleverse{25} My children, suffer patiently the wrath
that has come upon you from God, for your enemy has persecuted you; but
shortly you will see his destruction and will tread upon their necks.
\bibleverse{26} My delicate ones have traveled rough roads. They were
taken away like a flock carried off by enemies.

\bibleverse{27} Take courage, my children, and cry to God; for you will
be remembered by him who has brought this upon you. \bibleverse{28} For
as it was your decision to go astray from God, return and seek him ten
times more. \bibleverse{29} For he who brought these calamities upon you
will bring you everlasting joy again with your salvation.
\bibleverse{30} Take courage, O Jerusalem, for he who called you by name
will comfort you. \bibleverse{31} Miserable are those who afflicted you
and rejoiced at your fall. \bibleverse{32} Miserable are the cities
which your children served. Miserable is she who received your sons.
\bibleverse{33} For as she rejoiced at your fall and was glad of your
ruin, so she will be grieved at her own desolation. \bibleverse{34} And
I will take away her pride in her great multitude and her boasting will
be turned into mourning. \bibleverse{35} For fire will come upon her
from the Everlasting for many days; and she will be inhabited by demons
for a long time.

\bibleverse{36} O Jerusalem, look around you toward the east, and behold
the joy that comes to you from God. \bibleverse{37} Behold, your sons
come, whom you sent away. They come gathered together from the east to
the west at the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the glory of God.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Take off the garment of your mourning and affliction, O
Jerusalem, and put on forever the beauty of the glory from God.
\bibleverse{2} Put on the robe of the righteousness from God. Set on
your head a diadem of the glory of the Everlasting. \bibleverse{3} For
God will show your splendor everywhere under heaven. \bibleverse{4} For
your name will be called by God forever ``Righteous Peace, Godly
Glory''.

\bibleverse{5} Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand upon the height. Look
around you toward the east and see your children gathered from the going
down of the sun to its rising at the word of the Holy One, rejoicing
that God has remembered them. \bibleverse{6} For they went from you on
foot, being led away by their enemies, but God brings them in to you
carried on high with glory, on a royal throne. \bibleverse{7} For God
has appointed that every high mountain and the everlasting hills should
be made low, and the valleys filled up to make the ground level, that
Israel may go safely in the glory of God. \bibleverse{8} Moreover the
woods and every sweet smelling tree have shaded Israel by the
commandment of God. \bibleverse{9} For God will lead Israel with joy in
the light of his glory with the mercy and righteousness that come from
him.

\hypertarget{the-letter-of-jeremy-jeremiah}{%
\subsection{The Letter of Jeremy
(Jeremiah)}\label{the-letter-of-jeremy-jeremiah}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} A copy of a letter that Jeremy sent to those who were to
be led captives into Babylon by the king of the Babylonians, to give
them the message that God commanded him.

\bibleverse{2} Because of the sins which you have committed before God,
you will be led away captives to Babylon by Nabuchodonosor king of the
Babylonians. \bibleverse{3} So when you come to Babylon, you will remain
there many years, and for a long season, even for seven generations.
After that, I will bring you out peacefully from there. \bibleverse{4}
But now you will see in Babylon gods of silver, gold, wood carried on
shoulders, which cause the nations to fear. \bibleverse{5} Beware
therefore that you in no way become like these foreigners. Don't let
fear take hold of you because of them when you see the multitude before
them and behind them, worshiping them. \bibleverse{6} But say in your
hearts, ``O Lord, we must worship you.'' \bibleverse{7} For my angel is
with you, and I myself care for your souls. \bibleverse{8} For their
tongue is polished by the workman, and they themselves are overlaid with
gold and with silver; yet they are only fake, and can't speak.
\bibleverse{9} And taking gold, as if it were for a virgin who loves to
be happy, they make crowns for the heads of their gods. \bibleverse{10}
Sometimes also the priests take gold and silver from their gods, and
spend it on themselves. \bibleverse{11} The will even give some of it to
the common prostitutes. They dress them like men with garments, even the
gods of silver, gods of gold, and gods of wood. \bibleverse{12} Yet
these gods can't save themselves from rust and moths, even though they
are covered with purple garments. \bibleverse{13} They wipe their faces
because of the dust of the temple, which is thick upon them.
\bibleverse{14} And he who can't put to death one who offends against
him holds a sceptre, as though he were judge of a country.
\bibleverse{15} He has also a dagger in his right hand, and an axe, but
can't deliver himself from war and robbers. \bibleverse{16} By this they
are known not to be gods. Therefore don't fear them. \bibleverse{17} For
like a vessel that a man uses is worth nothing when it is broken, even
so it is with their gods. When they are set up in the temples, their
eyes are full of dust through the feet of those who come in.
\bibleverse{18} As the courts are secured on every side upon him who
offends the king, as being committed to suffer death, even so the
priests secure their temples with doors, with locks, and bars, lest they
be carried off by robbers. \bibleverse{19} They light candles for them,
yes, more than for themselves, even though they can't see one.
\bibleverse{20} They are like one of the beams of the temple. Men say
their hearts are eaten out when things creeping out of the earth devour
both them and their clothing. They don't feel it \bibleverse{21} when
their faces are blackened through the smoke that comes out of the
temple. \bibleverse{22} Bats, swallows, and birds land on their bodies
and heads. So do the cats. \bibleverse{23} By this you may know that
they are no gods. Therefore don't fear them. \bibleverse{24}
Notwithstanding the gold with which they are covered to make them
beautiful, unless someone wipes off the tarnish, they won't shine; for
they didn't even feel it when they were molten. \bibleverse{25} Things
in which there is no breath are bought at any cost. \bibleverse{26}
Having no feet, they are carried upon shoulders. By this, they declare
to men that they are worth nothing. \bibleverse{27} Those who serve them
are also ashamed, for if they fall to the ground at any time, they can't
rise up again by themselves. If they are bowed down, they can't make
themselves straight; but the offerings are set before them, as if they
were dead men. \bibleverse{28} And the things that are sacrificed to
them, their priests sell and spend. In like manner, their wives also lay
up part of it in salt; but to the poor and to the impotent they give
none of it. \bibleverse{29} The menstruous woman and the woman in
childbed touch their sacrifices, knowing therefore by these things that
they are no gods. Don't fear them. \bibleverse{30} For how can they be
called gods? Because women set food before the gods of silver, gold, and
wood. \bibleverse{31} And in their temples the priests sit on seats,
having their clothes torn and their heads and beards shaven, and nothing
on their heads. \bibleverse{32} They roar and cry before their gods, as
men do at the feast when one is dead. \bibleverse{33} The priests also
take off garments from them and clothe their wives and children with
them. \bibleverse{34} Whether it is evil or good what one does to them,
they are not able to repay it. They can't set up a king or put him down.
\bibleverse{35} In like manner, they can neither give riches nor money.
Though a man make a vow to them and doesn't keep it, they will never
exact it. \bibleverse{36} They can save no man from death. They can't
deliver the weak from the mighty. \bibleverse{37} They can't restore a
blind man to his sight, or deliver anyone who is in distress.
\bibleverse{38} They can show no mercy to the widow, or do good to the
fatherless. \bibleverse{39} They are like the stones that are cut out of
the mountain, these gods of wood that are overlaid with gold and with
silver. Those who minister to them will be confounded.

\bibleverse{40} How could a man then think or say that they are gods,
when even the Chaldeans themselves dishonor them? \bibleverse{41} If
they shall see one mute who can't speak, they bring him and ask him to
call upon Bel, as though he were able to understand. \bibleverse{42} Yet
they can't perceive this themselves, and forsake them; for they have no
understanding. \bibleverse{43} The women also with cords around them sit
in the ways, burning bran for incense; but if any of them, drawn by
someone who passes by, lies with him, she reproaches her fellow, that
she was not thought as worthy as herself and her cord wasn't broken.
\bibleverse{44} Whatever is done among them is false. How could a man
then think or say that they are gods? \bibleverse{45} They are fashioned
by carpenters and goldsmiths. They can be nothing else than what the
workmen make them to be. \bibleverse{46} And they themselves who
fashioned them can never continue long. How then should the things that
are fashioned by them? \bibleverse{47} For they have left lies and
reproaches to those who come after. \bibleverse{48} For when there comes
any war or plague upon them, the priests consult with themselves, where
they may be hidden with them. \bibleverse{49} How then can't men
understand that they are no gods, which can't save themselves from war
or from plague? \bibleverse{50} For seeing they are only wood and
overlaid with gold and silver, it will be known hereafter that they are
false. \bibleverse{51} It will be manifest to all nations and kings that
they are no gods, but the works of men's hands, and that there is no
work of God in them. \bibleverse{52} Who then may not know that they are
not gods?

\bibleverse{53} For they can't set up a king in a land or give rain to
men. \bibleverse{54} They can't judge their own cause, or redress a
wrong, being unable; for they are like crows between heaven and earth.
\bibleverse{55} For even when fire falls upon the house of gods of wood
overlaid with gold or with silver, their priests will flee away, and
escape, but they themselves will be burned apart like beams.
\bibleverse{56} Moreover they can't withstand any king or enemies. How
could a man then admit or think that they are gods? \bibleverse{57}
Those gods of wood overlaid with silver or with gold aren't able to
escape from thieves or robbers. \bibleverse{58} The gold, silver, and
garments with which they are clothed---those who are strong will take
from them, and go away with them. They won't be able to help themselves.
\bibleverse{59} Therefore it is better to be a king who shows his
manhood, or else a vessel in a house profitable for whatever the owner
needs, than such false gods---or even a door in a house, to keep the
things safe that are in it, than such false gods; or better to be a
pillar of wood in a palace than such false gods.

\bibleverse{60} For sun, moon, and stars, being bright and sent to do
their jobs, are obedient. \bibleverse{61} Likewise also the lightning
when it flashes is beautiful to see. In the same way, the wind also
blows in every country. \bibleverse{62} And when God commands the clouds
to go over the whole world, they do as they are told. \bibleverse{63}
And the fire sent from above to consume mountains and woods does as it
is commanded; but these are to be compared to them neither in show nor
power. \bibleverse{64} Therefore a man shouldn't think or say that they
are gods, seeing they aren't able to judge causes or to do good to men.
\bibleverse{65} Knowing therefore that they are no gods, don't fear
them. \bibleverse{66} For they can neither curse nor bless kings.
\bibleverse{67} They can't show signs in the heavens among the nations,
or shine as the sun, or give light as the moon. \bibleverse{68} The
beasts are better than they; for they can get under a covert, and help
themselves. \bibleverse{69} In no way then is it manifest to us that
they are gods. Therefore don't fear them. \bibleverse{70} For as a
scarecrow in a garden of cucumbers that keeps nothing, so are their gods
of wood overlaid with gold and silver. \bibleverse{71} Likewise also
their gods of wood overlaid with gold and with silver, are like a white
thorn in an orchard that every bird sits upon. They are also like a dead
body that is thrown out into the dark. \bibleverse{72} You will know
them to be no gods by the bright purple that rots upon them. They
themselves will be consumed afterwards, and will be a reproach in the
country. \bibleverse{73} Better therefore is the just man who has no
idols; for he will be far from reproach.
