\hypertarget{blessings}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\hypertarget{blessings-1}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings-1}}

\hypertarget{blessings-2}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings-2}}

\hypertarget{blessings-3}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings-3}}

\hypertarget{blessings-4}{%
\subsection{Blessings}\label{blessings-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Paul, an apostle of Christ\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} Jesus through the will of God, and
Timothy our brother,

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-for-the-work-of-god-in-thessaloniki-and-expression-of-joy-for-the-exemplary-life-of-faith-in-the-community}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving for the work of God in Thessaloniki and
expression of joy for the exemplary life of faith in the
community}\label{thanksgiving-for-the-work-of-god-in-thessaloniki-and-expression-of-joy-for-the-exemplary-life-of-faith-in-the-community}}

\bibleverse{2} to the saints and faithful brothers\footnote{\textbf{1:2}
  The word for ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be
  correctly translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} in
Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ.

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-for-advances-in-faith-and-christian-community-loyalty-in-all-tribulations}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving for advances in faith and Christian community
loyalty in all
tribulations}\label{thanksgiving-for-advances-in-faith-and-christian-community-loyalty-in-all-tribulations}}

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-for-the-good-christian-state-faith-love-and-knowledge-of-the-church}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving for the good Christian state (faith, love and
knowledge) of the
church}\label{thanksgiving-for-the-good-christian-state-faith-love-and-knowledge-of-the-church}}

\hypertarget{admonition-to-fight-for-the-healthy-message-of-salvation-against-false-teachers}{%
\subsection{Admonition to fight for the healthy message of salvation
against false
teachers}\label{admonition-to-fight-for-the-healthy-message-of-salvation-against-false-teachers}}

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-for-the-firmness-of-timothys-faith}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving of the apostle for the firmness of Timothy's
faith}\label{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-for-the-firmness-of-timothys-faith}}

\bibleverse{3} We give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, praying always for you, \bibleverse{4} having heard of your
faith in Christ Jesus and of the love which you have toward all the
saints, \bibleverse{5} because of the hope which is laid up for you in
the heavens, of which you heard before in the word of the truth of the
Good News

\hypertarget{gods-gift-keeps-timothy-and-paul-connected}{%
\subsection{God's gift keeps Timothy and Paul
connected}\label{gods-gift-keeps-timothy-and-paul-connected}}

\bibleverse{6} which has come to you, even as it is in all the world and
is bearing fruit and growing, as it does in you also, since the day you
heard and knew the grace of God in truth, \bibleverse{7} even as you
learned from Epaphras our beloved fellow servant, who is a faithful
servant of Christ on your\footnote{\textbf{1:7} NU reads our} behalf,

\hypertarget{the-christians-position-on-the-law}{%
\subsection{The Christian's position on the
law}\label{the-christians-position-on-the-law}}

\bibleverse{8} who also declared to us your love in the Spirit.

\hypertarget{intercession-both-for-the-growth-of-the-church-in-the-knowledge-of-god-and-the-glory-of-christ-and-for-the-pursuit-of-worthy-christian-walks}{%
\subsection{Intercession both for the growth of the church in the
knowledge of God and the glory of Christ and for the pursuit of worthy
Christian
walks}\label{intercession-both-for-the-growth-of-the-church-in-the-knowledge-of-god-and-the-glory-of-christ-and-for-the-pursuit-of-worthy-christian-walks}}

\bibleverse{9} For this cause, we also, since the day we heard this,
don't cease praying and making requests for you, that you may be filled
with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and
understanding, \bibleverse{10} that you may walk worthily of the Lord,
to please him in all respects, bearing fruit in every good work and
increasing in the knowledge of God,

\hypertarget{apostolic-intercession-for-the-church}{%
\subsection{Apostolic Intercession for the
Church}\label{apostolic-intercession-for-the-church}}

\bibleverse{11} strengthened with all power, according to the might of
his glory, for all endurance and perseverance with joy,

\hypertarget{the-apostles-experience-of-grace-and-his-call-to-testify-to-the-christian-truth-of-salvation-praise-be-the-grace-that-jesus-gave-him}{%
\subsection{The apostle's experience of grace and his call to testify to
the Christian truth of salvation; Praise be the grace that Jesus gave
him}\label{the-apostles-experience-of-grace-and-his-call-to-testify-to-the-christian-truth-of-salvation-praise-be-the-grace-that-jesus-gave-him}}

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-example-of-the-apostle-the-infidelity-of-some-brothers-and-the-glorious-behavior-of-onesiphorus}{%
\subsection{Reference to the example of the apostle, the infidelity of
some brothers and the glorious behavior of
Onesiphorus}\label{reference-to-the-example-of-the-apostle-the-infidelity-of-some-brothers-and-the-glorious-behavior-of-onesiphorus}}

\bibleverse{12} giving thanks to the Father, who made us fit to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, \bibleverse{13} who
delivered us out of the power of darkness, and translated us into the
Kingdom of the Son of his love,

\hypertarget{the-incomparable-greatness-of-the-risen-christ-and-the-redemption-wrought-by-his-death-on-the-cross}{%
\subsection{The incomparable greatness of the risen Christ and the
redemption wrought by his death on the
cross}\label{the-incomparable-greatness-of-the-risen-christ-and-the-redemption-wrought-by-his-death-on-the-cross}}

\bibleverse{14} in whom we have our redemption,\footnote{\textbf{1:14}
  TR adds ``through his blood,''} the forgiveness of our sins.
\bibleverse{15} He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of
all creation. \bibleverse{16} For by him all things were created in the
heavens and on the earth, visible things and invisible things, whether
thrones or dominions or principalities or powers. All things have been
created through him and for him. \bibleverse{17} He is before all
things, and in him all things are held together.

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-timothy-to-fight-for-christian-truth-against-heresy}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to Timothy to fight for Christian truth against
heresy}\label{exhortation-to-timothy-to-fight-for-christian-truth-against-heresy}}

\bibleverse{18} He is the head of the body, the assembly, who is the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have
the preeminence. \bibleverse{19} For all the fullness was pleased to
dwell in him, \bibleverse{20} and through him to reconcile all things to
himself by him, whether things on the earth or things in the heavens,
having made peace through the blood of his cross.

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-blessing-that-the-colossians-received-for-the-preaching-of-the-message-of-salvation-reminder-to-persevere}{%
\subsection{Reference to the blessing that the Colossians received for
the preaching of the message of salvation; Reminder to
Persevere}\label{reference-to-the-blessing-that-the-colossians-received-for-the-preaching-of-the-message-of-salvation-reminder-to-persevere}}

\bibleverse{21} You, being in past times alienated and enemies in your
mind in your evil deeds, \bibleverse{22} yet now he has reconciled in
the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and without
defect and blameless before him, \bibleverse{23} if it is so that you
continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, and not moved away from
the hope of the Good News which you heard, which is being proclaimed in
all creation under heaven, of which I, Paul, was made a servant.

\hypertarget{pauls-call-and-his-right-to-work-as-a-gentile-apostle-in-preaching-the-salvation-council-of-god-despite-all-the-sufferings-and-hard-struggles}{%
\subsection{Paul's call and his right to work as a gentile apostle in
preaching the salvation council of God despite all the sufferings and
hard
struggles}\label{pauls-call-and-his-right-to-work-as-a-gentile-apostle-in-preaching-the-salvation-council-of-god-despite-all-the-sufferings-and-hard-struggles}}

\bibleverse{24} Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and fill
up on my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh for his body's sake, which is the assembly, \bibleverse{25} of
which I was made a servant according to the stewardship of God which was
given me toward you to fulfill the word of God, \bibleverse{26} the
mystery which has been hidden for ages and generations. But now it has
been revealed to his saints, \bibleverse{27} to whom God was pleased to
make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the
Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. \bibleverse{28} We
proclaim him, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus;
\bibleverse{29} for which I also labor, striving according to his
working, which works in me mightily.

\hypertarget{exhortation-to-timothy-to-concern-himself-with-the-preaching-of-the-doctrine-of-salvation-and-to-be-strong-in-battle-and-suffering}{%
\subsection{Exhortation to Timothy to concern himself with the preaching
of the doctrine of salvation and to be strong in battle and
suffering}\label{exhortation-to-timothy-to-concern-himself-with-the-preaching-of-the-doctrine-of-salvation-and-to-be-strong-in-battle-and-suffering}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\hypertarget{reminder-of-the-energetic-selfless-and-loving-efficacy-of-gods-messengers-in-thessalonica}{%
\subsection{Reminder of the energetic, selfless and loving efficacy of
God's messengers in
Thessalonica}\label{reminder-of-the-energetic-selfless-and-loving-efficacy-of-gods-messengers-in-thessalonica}}

\hypertarget{the-purpose-of-the-letter-the-revelation-of-a-secret-of-salvation}{%
\subsection{The purpose of the letter, the revelation of a secret of
salvation}\label{the-purpose-of-the-letter-the-revelation-of-a-secret-of-salvation}}

\hypertarget{warning-against-hasty-expectations-instruction-on-the-time-of-the-second-coming-of-the-lord-and-on-the-appearance-of-the-antichrist-before-it}{%
\subsection{Warning against hasty expectations; Instruction on the time
of the second coming of the Lord and on the appearance of the Antichrist
before
it}\label{warning-against-hasty-expectations-instruction-on-the-time-of-the-second-coming-of-the-lord-and-on-the-appearance-of-the-antichrist-before-it}}

\hypertarget{regulations-on-congregational-prayer-for-all-people-especially-for-authorities}{%
\subsection{Regulations on congregational prayer for all people,
especially for
authorities}\label{regulations-on-congregational-prayer-for-all-people-especially-for-authorities}}

\bibleverse{1} For I desire to have you know how greatly I struggle for
you and for those at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face
in the flesh; \bibleverse{2} that their hearts may be comforted, they
being knit together in love, and gaining all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, that they may know the mystery of God, both
of the Father and of Christ, \bibleverse{3} in whom all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hidden.

\hypertarget{full-knowledge-of-the-salvation-created-by-christ-saves-the-colossians-from-being-deceived-by-false-teachings}{%
\subsection{Full knowledge of the salvation created by Christ saves the
Colossians from being deceived by false
teachings}\label{full-knowledge-of-the-salvation-created-by-christ-saves-the-colossians-from-being-deceived-by-false-teachings}}

\bibleverse{4} Now I say this that no one may delude you with
persuasiveness of speech. \bibleverse{5} For though I am absent in the
flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit, rejoicing and seeing your order,
and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ. \bibleverse{6} As
therefore you received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in him,
\bibleverse{7} rooted and built up in him and established in the faith,
even as you were taught, abounding in it in thanksgiving.

\hypertarget{rules-for-the-conduct-of-men-and-women-in-the-worship-of-the-christian-church}{%
\subsection{Rules for the conduct of men and women in the worship of the
Christian
church}\label{rules-for-the-conduct-of-men-and-women-in-the-worship-of-the-christian-church}}

\hypertarget{strength-and-consolation-of-the-warrior-of-christ-in-the-battle-of-suffering}{%
\subsection{Strength and consolation of the warrior of Christ in the
battle of
suffering}\label{strength-and-consolation-of-the-warrior-of-christ-in-the-battle-of-suffering}}

\bibleverse{8} Be careful that you don't let anyone rob you through his
philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
elemental spirits of the world, and not after Christ.

\hypertarget{by-the-merit-of-christ-you-have-achieved-salvation-and-in-christ-dead-buried-and-risen-with-him-you-are-freed-from-the-dominion-of-spiritual-powers}{%
\subsection{By the merit of Christ you have achieved salvation, and in
Christ (dead, buried and risen with him) you are freed from the dominion
of spiritual
powers}\label{by-the-merit-of-christ-you-have-achieved-salvation-and-in-christ-dead-buried-and-risen-with-him-you-are-freed-from-the-dominion-of-spiritual-powers}}

\bibleverse{9} For in him all the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily,
\bibleverse{10} and in him you are made full, who is the head of all
principality and power. \bibleverse{11} In him you were also circumcised
with a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off of the body
of the sins of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ, \bibleverse{12}
having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised
with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the
dead.

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-for-the-voluntary-reception-of-the-message-of-salvation-by-the-community-and-praise-for-their-constancy-in-suffering}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving for the voluntary reception of the message of
salvation by the community and praise for their constancy in
suffering}\label{thanksgiving-for-the-voluntary-reception-of-the-message-of-salvation-by-the-community-and-praise-for-their-constancy-in-suffering}}

\hypertarget{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-for-the-divine-election-of-the-thessalonians-admonition-to-cling-to-the-truth-of-teaching-received-intercession-for-divine-strengthening}{%
\subsection{Thanksgiving of the Apostle for the divine election of the
Thessalonians; Admonition to cling to the truth of teaching received;
Intercession for divine
strengthening}\label{thanksgiving-of-the-apostle-for-the-divine-election-of-the-thessalonians-admonition-to-cling-to-the-truth-of-teaching-received-intercession-for-divine-strengthening}}

\bibleverse{13} You were dead through your trespasses and the
uncircumcision of your flesh. He made you alive together with him,
having forgiven us all our trespasses,

\hypertarget{warning-of-useless-verbiage-empty-talk-and-falsehoods-of-false-teachers}{%
\subsection{Warning of useless verbiage, empty talk and falsehoods of
false
teachers}\label{warning-of-useless-verbiage-empty-talk-and-falsehoods-of-false-teachers}}

\bibleverse{14} wiping out the handwriting in ordinances which was
against us. He has taken it out of the way, nailing it to the cross.
\bibleverse{15} Having stripped the principalities and the powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.

\hypertarget{observing-external-customs-and-the-hypocritical-nature-of-false-teachers-are-useless-and-carnal}{%
\subsection{Observing external customs and the hypocritical nature of
false teachers are useless and
carnal}\label{observing-external-customs-and-the-hypocritical-nature-of-false-teachers-are-useless-and-carnal}}

\bibleverse{16} Let no one therefore judge you in eating or drinking, or
with respect to a feast day or a new moon or a Sabbath day,

\hypertarget{longing-of-the-apostle-your-frustrated-travel-plans}{%
\subsection{Longing of the apostle; your frustrated travel
plans}\label{longing-of-the-apostle-your-frustrated-travel-plans}}

\bibleverse{17} which are a shadow of the things to come; but the body
is Christ's. \bibleverse{18} Let no one rob you of your prize by
self-abasement and worshiping of the angels, dwelling in the things
which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,

\hypertarget{the-hopelessness-of-the-false-teachers-due-to-the-solid-foundation-of-the-church-laid-by-god}{%
\subsection{The hopelessness of the false teachers due to the solid
foundation of the church laid by
God}\label{the-hopelessness-of-the-false-teachers-due-to-the-solid-foundation-of-the-church-laid-by-god}}

\bibleverse{19} and not holding firmly to the Head, from whom all the
body, being supplied and knit together through the joints and ligaments,
grows with God's growth. \bibleverse{20} If you died with Christ from
the elemental spirits of the world, why, as though living in the world,
do you subject yourselves to ordinances, \bibleverse{21} ``Don't handle,
nor taste, nor touch'' \bibleverse{22} (all of which perish with use),
according to the precepts and doctrines of men? \bibleverse{23} These
things indeed appear like wisdom in self-imposed worship, humility, and
severity to the body, but aren't of any value against the indulgence of
the flesh.

\hypertarget{warning-to-intercede-for-the-success-of-the-announcement-of-salvation-blessing-for-the-christian-state-of-the-church}{%
\subsection{Warning to intercede for the success of the announcement of
salvation; Blessing for the Christian state of the
church}\label{warning-to-intercede-for-the-success-of-the-announcement-of-salvation-blessing-for-the-christian-state-of-the-church}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\hypertarget{search-not-what-is-on-earth}{%
\subsection{Search, not what is on
earth}\label{search-not-what-is-on-earth}}

\hypertarget{information-about-timoteos-mission-and-the-favorable-outcome-of-his-mission-the-thanks-of-the-apostle-and-his-desire-for-prayer}{%
\subsection{Information about Timoteo's mission and the favorable
outcome of his mission; the thanks of the apostle and his desire for
prayer}\label{information-about-timoteos-mission-and-the-favorable-outcome-of-his-mission-the-thanks-of-the-apostle-and-his-desire-for-prayer}}

\hypertarget{description-of-the-future-false-teachers-and-the-moral-corruption-of-the-last-time}{%
\subsection{Description of the future false teachers and the moral
corruption of the last
time}\label{description-of-the-future-false-teachers-and-the-moral-corruption-of-the-last-time}}

\hypertarget{requirements-for-the-position-of-chief}{%
\subsection{Requirements for the position of
chief}\label{requirements-for-the-position-of-chief}}

\bibleverse{1} If then you were raised together with Christ, seek the
things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God.
\bibleverse{2} Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the
things that are on the earth. \bibleverse{3} For you died, and your life
is hidden with Christ in God. \bibleverse{4} When Christ, our life, is
revealed, then you will also be revealed with him in glory.

\hypertarget{kill-whats-below}{%
\subsection{Kill what's below}\label{kill-whats-below}}

\bibleverse{5} Put to death therefore your members which are on the
earth: sexual immorality, uncleanness, depraved passion, evil desire,
and covetousness, which is idolatry.

\hypertarget{rules-of-conduct-towards-loafers-reminder-to-lead-an-orderly-lifestyle-and-practice-wise-discipline}{%
\subsection{Rules of conduct towards loafers; Reminder to Lead an
Orderly Lifestyle and Practice Wise
Discipline}\label{rules-of-conduct-towards-loafers-reminder-to-lead-an-orderly-lifestyle-and-practice-wise-discipline}}

\bibleverse{6} For these things' sake the wrath of God comes on the
children of disobedience. \bibleverse{7} You also once walked in those,
when you lived in them,

\hypertarget{assistantship-requirements}{%
\subsection{Assistantship
Requirements}\label{assistantship-requirements}}

\bibleverse{8} but now you must put them all away: anger, wrath, malice,
slander, and shameful speaking out of your mouth. \bibleverse{9} Don't
lie to one another, seeing that you have put off the old man with his
doings,

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-example-of-paul-and-a-reminder-to-persevere-and-hold-fast-to-traditional-teachings-and-holy-scripture-despite-all-suffering}{%
\subsection{Reference to the example of Paul and a reminder to persevere
and hold fast to traditional teachings and Holy Scripture despite all
suffering}\label{reference-to-the-example-of-paul-and-a-reminder-to-persevere-and-hold-fast-to-traditional-teachings-and-holy-scripture-despite-all-suffering}}

\bibleverse{10} and have put on the new man, who is being renewed in
knowledge after the image of his Creator, \bibleverse{11} where there
can't be Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian,
Scythian, bondservant, or free person; but Christ is all, and in all.

\hypertarget{attract-what-comes-from-above}{%
\subsection{Attract what comes from
above}\label{attract-what-comes-from-above}}

\bibleverse{12} Put on therefore, as God's chosen ones, holy and
beloved, a heart of compassion, kindness, lowliness, humility, and
perseverance; \bibleverse{13} bearing with one another, and forgiving
each other, if any man has a complaint against any; even as Christ
forgave you, so you also do.

\hypertarget{conclusion-of-the-previous-instructions-referring-to-the-community-as-bearer-of-the-truth-of-salvation}{%
\subsection{Conclusion of the previous instructions referring to the
community as bearer of the truth of
salvation}\label{conclusion-of-the-previous-instructions-referring-to-the-community-as-bearer-of-the-truth-of-salvation}}

\bibleverse{14} Above all these things, walk in love, which is the bond
of perfection. \bibleverse{15} And let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to which also you were called in one body, and be thankful.
\bibleverse{16} Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; in all
wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your heart to the Lord.

\hypertarget{personal-greeting-and-blessing-from-pablo}{%
\subsection{Personal greeting and blessing from
Pablo}\label{personal-greeting-and-blessing-from-pablo}}

\bibleverse{17} Whatever you do, in word or in deed, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.

\hypertarget{house-sign-i.e.-reminders-about-christian-family-life}{%
\subsection{House sign (i.e. reminders about Christian family
life)}\label{house-sign-i.e.-reminders-about-christian-family-life}}

\bibleverse{18} Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting
in the Lord. \bibleverse{19} Husbands, love your wives, and don't be
bitter against them. \bibleverse{20} Children, obey your parents in all
things, for this pleases the Lord. \bibleverse{21} Fathers, don't
provoke your children, so that they won't be discouraged.
\bibleverse{22} Servants, obey in all things those who are your masters
according to the flesh, not just when they are looking, as men pleasers,
but in singleness of heart, fearing God. \bibleverse{23} And whatever
you do, work heartily, as for the Lord and not for men, \bibleverse{24}
knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the
inheritance; for you serve the Lord Christ. \bibleverse{25} But he who
does wrong will receive again for the wrong that he has done, and there
is no partiality.

\hypertarget{another-call-to-timothy-to-be-true-to-his-craft}{%
\subsection{Another call to Timothy to be true to his
craft}\label{another-call-to-timothy-to-be-true-to-his-craft}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\hypertarget{warning-of-the-hypocritical-abstinence-of-false-teachers}{%
\subsection{Warning of the hypocritical abstinence of false
teachers}\label{warning-of-the-hypocritical-abstinence-of-false-teachers}}

\hypertarget{reminder-of-chastity-and-honesty-in-business-life}{%
\subsection{Reminder of chastity and honesty in business
life}\label{reminder-of-chastity-and-honesty-in-business-life}}

\bibleverse{1} Masters, give to your servants that which is just and
equal, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.

\hypertarget{special-individual-admonitions-to-pray-especially-intercession-and-behave-in-the-right-way-against-non-christians}{%
\subsection{Special individual admonitions to pray (especially
intercession) and behave in the right way against
non-Christians}\label{special-individual-admonitions-to-pray-especially-intercession-and-behave-in-the-right-way-against-non-christians}}

\bibleverse{2} Continue steadfastly in prayer, watching in it with
thanksgiving, \bibleverse{3} praying together for us also, that God may
open to us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for
which I am also in bonds, \bibleverse{4} that I may reveal it as I ought
to speak. \bibleverse{5} Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside,
redeeming the time.

\hypertarget{the-correct-christian-exercise-of-piety-and-the-blessing-that-was-promised}{%
\subsection{The correct Christian exercise of piety and the blessing
that was
promised}\label{the-correct-christian-exercise-of-piety-and-the-blessing-that-was-promised}}

\hypertarget{solemn-reference-of-the-apostle-to-the-near-end-of-his-life-his-self-testimony-and-his-hope}{%
\subsection{Solemn reference of the apostle to the near end of his life;
his self-testimony and his
hope}\label{solemn-reference-of-the-apostle-to-the-near-end-of-his-life-his-self-testimony-and-his-hope}}

\bibleverse{6} Let your speech always be with grace, seasoned with salt,
that you may know how you ought to answer each one.

\hypertarget{personal-the-mission-of-tychicus-and-onesimus-and-the-end-of-the-letters-greetings-and-blessings}{%
\subsection{Personal (the mission of Tychicus and Onesimus) and the end
of the letters; Greetings and
blessings}\label{personal-the-mission-of-tychicus-and-onesimus-and-the-end-of-the-letters-greetings-and-blessings}}

\bibleverse{7} All my affairs will be made known to you by Tychicus, the
beloved brother, faithful servant, and fellow bondservant in the Lord.
\bibleverse{8} I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that he
may know your circumstances and comfort your hearts,

\hypertarget{reminder-of-brotherly-love-and-quiet-hard-work}{%
\subsection{Reminder of brotherly love and quiet hard
work}\label{reminder-of-brotherly-love-and-quiet-hard-work}}

\hypertarget{personal-situation-of-the-apostle-last-orders-petitions-messages-greetings-and-blessings}{%
\subsection{Personal situation of the apostle, last orders, petitions,
messages, greetings and
blessings}\label{personal-situation-of-the-apostle-last-orders-petitions-messages-greetings-and-blessings}}

\bibleverse{9} together with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother,
who is one of you. They will make known to you everything that is going
on here. \bibleverse{10} Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you,
and Mark the cousin of Barnabas (concerning whom you received
instructions, ``if he comes to you, receive him''), \bibleverse{11} and
Jesus who is called Justus. These are my only fellow workers for God's
Kingdom who are of the circumcision, men who have been a comfort to me.

\hypertarget{general-rules-for-timothy-especially-regarding-his-youth}{%
\subsection{General rules for Timothy, especially regarding his
youth}\label{general-rules-for-timothy-especially-regarding-his-youth}}

\bibleverse{12} Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ,
salutes you, always striving for you in his prayers, that you may stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God.

\hypertarget{no-pain-desperate-for-the-dead}{%
\subsection{No pain desperate for the
dead}\label{no-pain-desperate-for-the-dead}}

\bibleverse{13} For I testify about him that he has great zeal for you,
and for those in Laodicea, and for those in Hierapolis. \bibleverse{14}
Luke the beloved physician and Demas greet you. \bibleverse{15} Greet
the brothers who are in Laodicea, with Nymphas and the assembly that is
in his house. \bibleverse{16} When this letter has been read among you,
cause it to be read also in the assembly of the Laodiceans, and that you
also read the letter from Laodicea. \bibleverse{17} Tell Archippus,
``Take heed to the ministry which you have received in the Lord, that
you fulfill it.'' \bibleverse{18} I, Paul, write this greeting with my
own hand. Remember my chains. Grace be with you. Amen.
