\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} O LORD Almighty in heaven, God of our fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and of their righteous offspring, \bibverse{2} you who
have made heaven and earth, with all their order, \bibverse{3} who have
bound the sea by the word of your commandment, who have shut up the
deep, and sealed it by your terrible and glorious name, \bibverse{4}
whom all things fear, yes, tremble before your power, \bibverse{5} for
the majesty of your glory can't be borne, and the anger of your
threatening toward sinners is unbearable. \bibverse{6} Your merciful
promise is unmeasurable and unsearchable, \bibverse{7} for you are the
Lord Most High, of great compassion, patient and abundant in mercy, and
relent at human suffering. \bibverse{8} + 1:8 The Alex. MS. omits
You\ldots{} saved.You, O Lord, according to your great goodness have
promised repentance and forgiveness to those who have sinned against
you. Of your infinite mercies, you have appointed repentance to sinners,
that they may be saved. You therefore, O Lord, who are the God of the
just, have not appointed repentance to the just, to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, which have not sinned against you, but you have appointed
repentance to me who am a sinner. \bibverse{9} For I have sinned more
than the number of the sands of the sea. My transgressions are
multiplied,+ 1:9 The Alex. MS. omits O Lord\ldots{} multiplied. O Lord,
my transgressions are multiplied, and I am not worthy to behold and see
the height of heaven for the multitude of my iniquities. \bibverse{10} I
am bowed down with many iron bands, so that I can't lift up my head by
reason of my sins,+ 1:10 Some authorities omit by reason of my sins.
neither have I any relief; for I have provoked your wrath, and done that
which is evil before you:+ 1:10 The Alex. MS. omits I did\ldots{}
commandments. I didn't do your will, neither did I keep your
commandments. I have set up abominations, and have multiplied detestable
things. \bibverse{11} Now therefore I bow the knee of my heart, asking
you for grace. \bibverse{12} I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and I
acknowledge my iniquities; \bibverse{13} but, I humbly ask you, forgive
me, O Lord, forgive me, and please don't destroy me with my iniquities.
Don't be angry with me forever, by reserving evil for me. Don't condemn
me into the lower parts of the earth. For you, O Lord, are the God of
those who repent. \bibverse{14} In me you will show all your goodness,
for you will save me, who am unworthy, according to your great mercy.
\bibverse{15} Then I will praise you forever all the days of my life;
for all the army of heaven sings your praise, and yours is the glory
forever and ever. Amen.
