\hypertarget{the-call-to-rebuild-the-temple}{%
\subsection{The call to rebuild the
Temple}\label{the-call-to-rebuild-the-temple}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} In the second year of Darius the king, on the first day of
the sixth month, this message from the Lord came through Haggai the
prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to
Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest: \bibverse{2} The Lord of
hosts says: The people say that the time has not yet come to rebuild the
temple of the Lord.

\bibverse{3} Then this message from the Lord came to Haggai the prophet:
\bibverse{4} Is it a time for you yourselves to live in your own
well-roofed houses, while this temple lies in ruins? \bibverse{5} The
Lord of hosts says: Consider your past experiences. \bibverse{6} You sow
much, but bring in little; you eat, but you do not have enough; you
drink, but are not filled; you clothe yourselves, but not enough to be
warm; and those who earn wages, put those wages in a bag with holes.
\bibverse{7} The Lord of hosts says: Consider your experiences.
\bibverse{8} Go up to the mountains, and bring wood and rebuild the
temple; then I will be pleased with it, and I will reveal my glory. The
Lord says: \bibverse{9} You looked for much, and it came to little; and
when you brought the harvest home, I blew it away. Why? The Lord of
hosts says: Because my temple lies in ruins, while you shelter in your
own houses. \bibverse{10} The heavens withhold the dew, and the earth
withholds its fruit, \bibverse{11} and I have called forth a drought
upon the land and upon the mountains, and upon the grain and the new
wine and the oil and upon that which the ground brings forth, and upon
people and animals, and upon all the labour of your hands.

\bibverse{12} Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshua the son of
Jehozadak the high priest, with all the rest of the people, obeyed the
command of the Lord their God and the words of Haggai the prophet, as
the Lord their God had sent him to them. They showed proper respect for
the Lord. \bibverse{13} Haggai, the prophet of the Lord, as the Lord
commanded him, told the people: ``The Lord says: I am with you.''

\bibverse{14} And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son
of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of
Jehozadak the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people,
so that they came and worked on the temple of the Lord of hosts, their
God, \bibverse{15} in the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month. \#\# The
future glory of the new Temple

In the second year of Darius the king,

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} on the twenty-first day of the seventh month, this message
from the Lord came to Haggai the prophet, \bibverse{2} telling him to
speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua,
the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to all the rest of the
people: \bibverse{3} Who is left amongst you that saw this temple in its
former glory? And how do you see it now? Doesn't it seem as though there
is nothing there? \bibverse{4} The Lord says: Yet now be strong,
Zerubbabel, be strong, Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest, be
strong, all you people of the land. The Lord says: Begin the work, for I
am with you. The Lord of hosts says: \bibverse{5} When your ancestors
left Egypt I made a promise to you, and I am still with you. Do not be
afraid! \bibverse{6} The Lord of hosts says: In a little while, I will
shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the land.
\bibverse{7} And I will shake all nations, and the precious things of
all nations shall come here; and I will fill this temple with glory. The
Lord of hosts says: \bibverse{8} The silver is mine, and the gold is
mine, \bibverse{9} The later glory of this temple shall be greater than
the former. The Lord of hosts says: In this place I will grant
prosperity.

This is the message of the Lord of hosts. \#\# Former displeasure and
the new promise of blessings

\bibverse{10} In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second
year of Darius, this message from the Lord came to Haggai the prophet:
\bibverse{11} The Lord of hosts says: ``Ask the priests for a ruling:
\bibverse{12} `If one carries consecrated meat in the fold of his
garment, and with that garment touches bread, or stew, or wine, or oil,
or any food, will it become holy?'\,''

And the priests answered: ``No.''

\bibverse{13} Then said Haggai, ``If one who is unclean by reason of a
dead body touches any of these, will it be unclean?''

And the priests answered: ``It would be unclean.''

\bibverse{14} Haggai replied: ``So is this people and so is this nation
before me, the Lord declares, and so is every work of their hands; and
that which they offer there is unclean. \bibverse{15} Think back from
this day, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the
Lord. \bibverse{16} How were you? When you came to a heap of grain
expecting twenty measures, there were only ten; when you came to the
wine vat to draw out fifty vessels, there were only twenty.
\bibverse{17} `I struck all the work of your hands with blasting and
blight, with mildew and with hail. Yet you didn't turn to me,' says the
Lord, \bibverse{18} `Think back from this day, think! From the
twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day when the foundations
of the temple of the Lord were laid, and consider. \bibverse{19} The
seed is in the granary, but the vine and the fig tree and the
pomegranate and the olive tree have not yet brought forth fruit. From
this day will I bless you.'\,'' \#\# Zerubbabel

\bibverse{20} This message from the Lord came to Haggai a second time on
the twenty-fourth day of the month: \bibverse{21} Tell Zerubbabel,
governor of Judah: I will shake the heavens and the earth; \bibverse{22}
and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms; and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the nations; and I will overthrow the
chariots, and those who ride in them; and the horses and their riders
shall come down, each by the sword of his fellow. \bibverse{23} In that
day, the Lord of hosts says, I will take you, Zerubbabel, my servant,
the son of Shealtiel, the Lord says, and will make you like a signet
ring, for I have chosen you, the Lord of hosts says.
