\hypertarget{greetings}{%
\subsection{Greetings}\label{greetings}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} From the elder to his dear friend Gaius, whom he sincerely
loves.

\bibverse{2} Dear friend, I pray that all may be well with you and that
you may have good health --- I know that all is well with your soul.
\bibverse{3} For it was a great joy to me, when some followers of the
Lord came and testified to your fidelity to the truth. I know that your
own life is guided by the truth. \bibverse{4} Nothing gives me greater
pleasure than to hear from time to time that the lives of my children
are guided by the truth. \#\# Gaius

\bibverse{5} Dear friend, you are faithful in all the things you do for
other followers --- even when they are strangers to you. \bibverse{6}
They themselves have testified before the church to your love. You will
do well to help them on their way in a manner worthy of the service of
God. \bibverse{7} For it was on behalf of Christ's name that they set
out, not accepting even one thing from the Gentiles. \bibverse{8}
Therefore, we should support people like them, and so take our share in
their work for the truth. \#\# Diotrephes and Demetrius

\bibverse{9} I wrote something to the church, but Diotrephes (who loves
to be the leader amongst them) doesn't welcome us. \bibverse{10} So if I
come, I will bring up his actions in telling wicked nonsense about us.
Not content with that, he not only refuses to personally welcome our
friends who are followers, but actually stops those who would, and
expels them from the church.

\bibverse{11} Dear friend, do not follow a bad example, but a good one.
The person who does what is good is from God; the person who does what
is bad has never seen God. \bibverse{12} Everyone has always had a good
word for Demetrius, and the truth itself speaks for him. Yes, and we
also add our good word, and you know that what we say is true. \#\#
Final words

\bibverse{13} I have many things to tell you, but I would rather not use
pen and ink. \bibverse{14} I hope to see you soon, and then we will
speak face to face. \bibverse{15} Peace be with you. The friends here
send you their greetings. Greet each one of our friends.
