\hypertarget{the-creation-of-the-world}{%
\subsection{The creation of the world}\label{the-creation-of-the-world}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} In the beginning, God\footnote{\textbf{1:1} The Hebrew
  word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} created the
heavens and the earth. \bibleverse{2} The earth was formless and empty.
Darkness was on the surface of the deep and God's Spirit was hovering
over the surface of the waters.

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-light}{%
\subsection{The creation of light}\label{the-creation-of-light}}

\bibleverse{3} God said, ``Let there be light,'' and there was light.
\bibleverse{4} God saw the light, and saw that it was good. God divided
the light from the darkness. \bibleverse{5} God called the light
``day'', and the darkness he called ``night''. There was evening and
there was morning, the first day.

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-the-expanse-of-heaven}{%
\subsection{The creation of the expanse of
Heaven}\label{the-creation-of-the-expanse-of-heaven}}

\bibleverse{6} God said, ``Let there be an expanse in the middle of the
waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.'' \bibleverse{7}
God made the expanse, and divided the waters which were under the
expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so.
\bibleverse{8} God called the expanse ``sky''. There was evening and
there was morning, a second day.

\hypertarget{the-separation-of-land-and-sea-and-the-creation-of-plants}{%
\subsection{The separation of land and sea and the creation of
plants}\label{the-separation-of-land-and-sea-and-the-creation-of-plants}}

\bibleverse{9} God said, ``Let the waters under the sky be gathered
together to one place, and let the dry land appear;'' and it was so.
\bibleverse{10} God called the dry land ``earth'', and the gathering
together of the waters he called ``seas''. God saw that it was good.
\bibleverse{11} God said, ``Let the earth yield grass, herbs yielding
seeds, and fruit trees bearing fruit after their kind, with their seeds
in it, on the earth;'' and it was so. \bibleverse{12} The earth yielded
grass, herbs yielding seed after their kind, and trees bearing fruit,
with their seeds in it, after their kind; and God saw that it was good.
\bibleverse{13} There was evening and there was morning, a third day.

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-the-stars}{%
\subsection{The creation of the stars}\label{the-creation-of-the-stars}}

\bibleverse{14} God said, ``Let there be lights in the expanse of the
sky to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs to mark
seasons, days, and years; \bibleverse{15} and let them be for lights in
the expanse of the sky to give light on the earth;'' and it was so.
\bibleverse{16} God made the two great lights: the greater light to rule
the day, and the lesser light to rule the night. He also made the stars.
\bibleverse{17} God set them in the expanse of the sky to give light to
the earth, \bibleverse{18} and to rule over the day and over the night,
and to divide the light from the darkness. God saw that it was good.
\bibleverse{19} There was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-aquatic-animals-and-birds}{%
\subsection{The creation of aquatic animals and
birds}\label{the-creation-of-aquatic-animals-and-birds}}

\bibleverse{20} God said, ``Let the waters abound with living creatures,
and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of the sky.''
\bibleverse{21} God created the large sea creatures and every living
creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed, after their kind,
and every winged bird after its kind. God saw that it was good.
\bibleverse{22} God blessed them, saying, ``Be fruitful, and multiply,
and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.''
\bibleverse{23} There was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-land-animals-and-man}{%
\subsection{The creation of land animals and
man}\label{the-creation-of-land-animals-and-man}}

\bibleverse{24} God said, ``Let the earth produce living creatures after
their kind, livestock, creeping things, and animals of the earth after
their kind;'' and it was so. \bibleverse{25} God made the animals of the
earth after their kind, and the livestock after their kind, and
everything that creeps on the ground after its kind. God saw that it was
good. \bibleverse{26} God said, ``Let's make man in our image, after our
likeness. Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the
birds of the sky, and over the livestock, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.'' \bibleverse{27}
God created man in his own image. In God's image he created him; male
and female he created them. \bibleverse{28} God blessed them. God said
to them, ``Be fruitful, multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it. Have
dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the sky, and over
every living thing that moves on the earth.'' \bibleverse{29} God said,
``Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:29} ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'',
  means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used
  as an interjection.} I have given you every herb yielding seed, which
is on the surface of all the earth, and every tree, which bears fruit
yielding seed. It will be your food. \bibleverse{30} To every animal of
the earth, and to every bird of the sky, and to everything that creeps
on the earth, in which there is life, I have given every green herb for
food;'' and it was so. \bibleverse{31} God saw everything that he had
made, and, behold, it was very good. There was evening and there was
morning, a sixth day.

\hypertarget{the-sabbath}{%
\subsection{The Sabbath}\label{the-sabbath}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} The heavens, the earth, and all their vast array were
finished. \bibleverse{2} On the seventh day God finished his work which
he had done; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he
had done. \bibleverse{3} God blessed the seventh day, and made it holy,
because he rested in it from all his work of creation which he had done.

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-man-and-woman-in-paradise}{%
\subsection{The creation of man and woman in
paradise}\label{the-creation-of-man-and-woman-in-paradise}}

\bibleverse{4} This is the history of the generations of the heavens and
of the earth when they were created, in the day that the
\textsc{Lord}\footnote{\textbf{2:4} When rendered in ALL CAPITAL
  LETTERS, ``\textsc{Lord}'' or ``GOD'' is the translation of God's
  Proper Name.} God made the earth and the heavens. \bibleverse{5} No
plant of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of the field had
yet sprung up; for the \textsc{Lord} God had not caused it to rain on
the earth. There was not a man to till the ground, \bibleverse{6} but a
mist went up from the earth, and watered the whole surface of the
ground. \bibleverse{7} The \textsc{Lord} God formed man from the dust of
the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
became a living soul. \bibleverse{8} The \textsc{Lord} God planted a
garden eastward, in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had formed.
\bibleverse{9} Out of the ground the \textsc{Lord} God made every tree
to grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food, including the
tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil.

\hypertarget{the-river-in-paradise-and-its-branches}{%
\subsection{The river in paradise and its
branches}\label{the-river-in-paradise-and-its-branches}}

\bibleverse{10} A river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from
there it was parted, and became the source of four rivers.
\bibleverse{11} The name of the first is Pishon: it flows through the
whole land of Havilah, where there is gold; \bibleverse{12} and the gold
of that land is good. Bdellium\footnote{\textbf{2:12} or, aromatic resin}
and onyx stone are also there. \bibleverse{13} The name of the second
river is Gihon. It is the same river that flows through the whole land
of Cush. \bibleverse{14} The name of the third river is Hiddekel. This
is the one which flows in front of Assyria. The fourth river is the
Euphrates.

\hypertarget{gods-commandment-by-adam}{%
\subsection{God's commandment by Adam}\label{gods-commandment-by-adam}}

\bibleverse{15} The \textsc{Lord} God took the man, and put him into the
garden of Eden to cultivate and keep it. \bibleverse{16} The
\textsc{Lord} God commanded the man, saying, ``You may freely eat of
every tree of the garden; \bibleverse{17} but you shall not eat of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil; for in the day that you eat of
it, you will surely die.''

\hypertarget{the-creation-of-woman-and-the-foundation-of-marriage}{%
\subsection{The creation of woman and the foundation of
marriage}\label{the-creation-of-woman-and-the-foundation-of-marriage}}

\bibleverse{18} The \textsc{Lord} God said, ``It is not good for the man
to be alone. I will make him a helper comparable to\footnote{\textbf{2:18}
  or, suitable for, or appropriate for.} him.'' \bibleverse{19} Out of
the ground the \textsc{Lord} God formed every animal of the field, and
every bird of the sky, and brought them to the man to see what he would
call them. Whatever the man called every living creature became its
name. \bibleverse{20} The man gave names to all livestock, and to the
birds of the sky, and to every animal of the field; but for man there
was not found a helper comparable to him. \bibleverse{21} The
\textsc{Lord} God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep. As the man
slept, he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in its place.
\bibleverse{22} The \textsc{Lord} God made a woman from the rib which he
had taken from the man, and brought her to the man. \bibleverse{23} The
man said, ``This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. She
will be called `woman,' because she was taken out of Man.''
\bibleverse{24} Therefore a man will leave his father and his mother,
and will join with his wife, and they will be one flesh. \bibleverse{25}
The man and his wife were both naked, and they were not ashamed.

\hypertarget{the-temptation-and-the-fall-of-man}{%
\subsection{The temptation and the fall of
man}\label{the-temptation-and-the-fall-of-man}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Now the serpent was more subtle than any animal of the
field which the \textsc{Lord} God had made. He said to the woman, ``Has
God really said, `You shall not eat of any tree of the garden'?''
\bibleverse{2} The woman said to the serpent, ``We may eat fruit from
the trees of the garden, \bibleverse{3} but not the fruit of the tree
which is in the middle of the garden. God has said, `You shall not eat
of it. You shall not touch it, lest you die.'\,'' \bibleverse{4} The
serpent said to the woman, ``You won't really die, \bibleverse{5} for
God knows that in the day you eat it, your eyes will be opened, and you
will be like God, knowing good and evil.'' \bibleverse{6} When the woman
saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the
eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took
some of its fruit, and ate. Then she gave some to her husband with her,
and he ate it, too. \bibleverse{7} Their eyes were opened, and they both
knew that they were naked. They sewed fig leaves together, and made
coverings for themselves.

\hypertarget{interrogation-and-punishment}{%
\subsection{Interrogation and
Punishment}\label{interrogation-and-punishment}}

\bibleverse{8} They heard the \textsc{Lord} God's voice walking in the
garden in the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the \textsc{Lord} God amongst the trees of the
garden. \bibleverse{9} The \textsc{Lord} God called to the man, and said
to him, ``Where are you?'' \bibleverse{10} The man said, ``I heard your
voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; so I hid
myself.'' \bibleverse{11} God said, ``Who told you that you were naked?
Have you eaten from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?''
\bibleverse{12} The man said, ``The woman whom you gave to be with me,
she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate it.'' \bibleverse{13} The
\textsc{Lord} God said to the woman, ``What have you done?'' The woman
said, ``The serpent deceived me, and I ate.'' \bibleverse{14} The
\textsc{Lord} God said to the serpent, ``Because you have done this, you
are cursed above all livestock, and above every animal of the field. You
shall go on your belly and you shall eat dust all the days of your life.
\bibleverse{15} I will put hostility between you and the woman, and
between your offspring and her offspring. He will bruise your head, and
you will bruise his heel.'' \bibleverse{16} To the woman he said, ``I
will greatly multiply your pain in childbirth. You will bear children in
pain. Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.''
\bibleverse{17} To Adam he said, ``Because you have listened to your
wife's voice, and have eaten from the tree, about which I commanded you,
saying, `You shall not eat of it,' the ground is cursed for your sake.
You will eat from it with much labour all the days of your life.
\bibleverse{18} It will yield thorns and thistles to you; and you will
eat the herb of the field. \bibleverse{19} You will eat bread by the
sweat of your face until you return to the ground, for you were taken
out of it. For you are dust, and you shall return to dust.''

\hypertarget{the-expulsion-from-paradise}{%
\subsection{The expulsion from
paradise}\label{the-expulsion-from-paradise}}

\bibleverse{20} The man called his wife Eve because she would be the
mother of all the living. \bibleverse{21} The \textsc{Lord} God made
garments of animal skins for Adam and for his wife, and clothed them.
\bibleverse{22} The \textsc{Lord} God said, ``Behold, the man has become
like one of us, knowing good and evil. Now, lest he reach out his hand,
and also take of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever---''
\bibleverse{23} Therefore the \textsc{Lord} God sent him out from the
garden of Eden, to till the ground from which he was taken.
\bibleverse{24} So he drove out the man; and he placed
cherubim\footnote{\textbf{3:24} cherubim are powerful angelic creatures,
  messengers of God with wings. See Ezekiel 10.} at the east of the
garden of Eden, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the
way to the tree of life.

\hypertarget{cain-and-abel}{%
\subsection{Cain and Abel}\label{cain-and-abel}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} The man knew\footnote{\textbf{4:1} or, lay with, or, had
  relations with} Eve his wife. She conceived,\footnote{\textbf{4:1} or,
  became pregnant} and gave birth to Cain, and said, ``I have gotten a
man with the \textsc{Lord}'s help.'' \bibleverse{2} Again she gave
birth, to Cain's brother Abel. Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was
a tiller of the ground. \bibleverse{3} As time passed, Cain brought an
offering to the \textsc{Lord} from the fruit of the ground.
\bibleverse{4} Abel also brought some of the firstborn of his flock and
of its fat. The \textsc{Lord} respected Abel and his offering,
\bibleverse{5} but he didn't respect Cain and his offering. Cain was
very angry, and the expression on his face fell. \bibleverse{6} The
\textsc{Lord} said to Cain, ``Why are you angry? Why has the expression
of your face fallen? \bibleverse{7} If you do well, won't it be lifted
up? If you don't do well, sin crouches at the door. Its desire is for
you, but you are to rule over it.'' \bibleverse{8} Cain said to Abel,
his brother, ``Let's go into the field.'' While they were in the field,
Cain rose up against Abel, his brother, and killed him.

\hypertarget{cains-punishment}{%
\subsection{Cain's Punishment}\label{cains-punishment}}

\bibleverse{9} The \textsc{Lord} said to Cain, ``Where is Abel, your
brother?'' He said, ``I don't know. Am I my brother's keeper?''
\bibleverse{10} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``What have you done? The voice
of your brother's blood cries to me from the ground. \bibleverse{11} Now
you are cursed because of the ground, which has opened its mouth to
receive your brother's blood from your hand. \bibleverse{12} From now
on, when you till the ground, it won't yield its strength to you. You
will be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth.'' \bibleverse{13} Cain
said to the \textsc{Lord}, ``My punishment is greater than I can bear.
\bibleverse{14} Behold, you have driven me out today from the surface of
the ground. I will be hidden from your face, and I will be a fugitive
and a wanderer in the earth. Whoever finds me will kill me.''
\bibleverse{15} The \textsc{Lord} said to him, ``Therefore whoever slays
Cain, vengeance will be taken on him sevenfold.'' The \textsc{Lord}
appointed a sign for Cain, so that anyone finding him would not strike
him. \bibleverse{16} Cain left the \textsc{Lord}'s presence, and lived
in the land of Nod, east of Eden.

\hypertarget{the-sons-of-cain}{%
\subsection{The sons of Cain}\label{the-sons-of-cain}}

\bibleverse{17} Cain knew his wife. She conceived, and gave birth to
Enoch. He built a city, and named the city after the name of his son,
Enoch. \bibleverse{18} Irad was born to Enoch. Irad became the father of
Mehujael. Mehujael became the father of Methushael. Methushael became
the father of Lamech. \bibleverse{19} Lamech took two wives: the name of
the first one was Adah, and the name of the second one was Zillah.
\bibleverse{20} Adah gave birth to Jabal, who was the father of those
who dwell in tents and have livestock. \bibleverse{21} His brother's
name was Jubal, who was the father of all who handle the harp and pipe.
\bibleverse{22} Zillah also gave birth to Tubal Cain, the forger of
every cutting instrument of bronze and iron. Tubal Cain's sister was
Naamah. \bibleverse{23} Lamech said to his wives, ``Adah and Zillah,
hear my voice. You wives of Lamech, listen to my speech, for I have
slain a man for wounding me, a young man for bruising me.
\bibleverse{24} If Cain will be avenged seven times, truly Lamech
seventy-seven times.''

\hypertarget{the-birth-of-seth}{%
\subsection{The birth of Seth}\label{the-birth-of-seth}}

\bibleverse{25} Adam knew his wife again. She gave birth to a son, and
named him Seth, saying, ``for God has given me another child instead of
Abel, for Cain killed him.'' \bibleverse{26} A son was also born to
Seth, and he named him Enosh. At that time men began to call on the
\textsc{Lord}'s name.

\hypertarget{the-descent-from-seth-to-noah}{%
\subsection{The descent from Seth to
Noah}\label{the-descent-from-seth-to-noah}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day
that God created man, he made him in God's likeness. \bibleverse{2} He
created them male and female, and blessed them. On the day they were
created, he named them Adam.\footnote{\textbf{5:2} ``Adam'' and ``Man''
  are spelled with the exact same consonants in Hebrew, so this can be
  correctly translated either way.} \bibleverse{3} Adam lived one
hundred and thirty years, and became the father of a son in his own
likeness, after his image, and named him Seth. \bibleverse{4} The days
of Adam after he became the father of Seth were eight hundred years, and
he became the father of other sons and daughters. \bibleverse{5} All the
days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years, then he died.
\bibleverse{6} Seth lived one hundred and five years, then became the
father of Enosh. \bibleverse{7} Seth lived after he became the father of
Enosh eight hundred and seven years, and became the father of other sons
and daughters. \bibleverse{8} All of the days of Seth were nine hundred
and twelve years, then he died. \bibleverse{9} Enosh lived ninety years,
and became the father of Kenan. \bibleverse{10} Enosh lived after he
became the father of Kenan eight hundred and fifteen years, and became
the father of other sons and daughters. \bibleverse{11} All of the days
of Enosh were nine hundred and five years, then he died. \bibleverse{12}
Kenan lived seventy years, then became the father of Mahalalel.
\bibleverse{13} Kenan lived after he became the father of Mahalalel
eight hundred and forty years, and became the father of other sons and
daughters \bibleverse{14} and all of the days of Kenan were nine hundred
and ten years, then he died. \bibleverse{15} Mahalalel lived sixty-five
years, then became the father of Jared. \bibleverse{16} Mahalalel lived
after he became the father of Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and
became the father of other sons and daughters. \bibleverse{17} All of
the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety-five years, then he
died. \bibleverse{18} Jared lived one hundred and sixty-two years, then
became the father of Enoch. \bibleverse{19} Jared lived after he became
the father of Enoch eight hundred years, and became the father of other
sons and daughters. \bibleverse{20} All of the days of Jared were nine
hundred and sixty-two years, then he died. \bibleverse{21} Enoch lived
sixty-five years, then became the father of Methuselah. \bibleverse{22}
After Methuselah's birth, Enoch walked with God for three hundred years,
and became the father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{23} All
the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years.
\bibleverse{24} Enoch walked with God, and he was not found, for God
took him. \bibleverse{25} Methuselah lived one hundred and eighty-seven
years, then became the father of Lamech. \bibleverse{26} Methuselah
lived after he became the father of Lamech seven hundred and eighty-two
years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
\bibleverse{27} All the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and
sixty-nine years, then he died. \bibleverse{28} Lamech lived one hundred
and eighty-two years, then became the father of a son. \bibleverse{29}
He named him Noah, saying, ``This one will comfort us in our work and in
the toil of our hands, caused by the ground which the \textsc{Lord} has
cursed.'' \bibleverse{30} Lamech lived after he became the father of
Noah five hundred and ninety-five years, and became the father of other
sons and daughters. \bibleverse{31} All the days of Lamech were seven
hundred and seventy-seven years, then he died. \bibleverse{32} Noah was
five hundred years old, then Noah became the father of Shem, Ham, and
Japheth.

\hypertarget{the-marriages-of-the-sons-of-god-with-the-daughters-of-men}{%
\subsection{The marriages of the sons of God with the daughters of
men}\label{the-marriages-of-the-sons-of-god-with-the-daughters-of-men}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} When men began to multiply on the surface of the ground,
and daughters were born to them, \bibleverse{2} God's sons saw that
men's daughters were beautiful, and they took any that they wanted for
themselves as wives. \bibleverse{3} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``My Spirit
will not strive with man forever, because he also is flesh; so his days
will be one hundred and twenty years.'' \bibleverse{4} The
Nephilim\footnote{\textbf{6:4} or, giants} were in the earth in those
days, and also after that, when God's sons came in to men's daughters
and had children with them. Those were the mighty men who were of old,
men of renown.

\hypertarget{the-wickedness-of-men.-flood-announcement}{%
\subsection{The wickedness of men. Flood
announcement}\label{the-wickedness-of-men.-flood-announcement}}

\bibleverse{5} The \textsc{Lord} saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of man's
heart was continually only evil. \bibleverse{6} The \textsc{Lord} was
sorry that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him in his
heart. \bibleverse{7} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``I will destroy man whom
I have created from the surface of the ground---man, along with animals,
creeping things, and birds of the sky---for I am sorry that I have made
them.'' \bibleverse{8} But Noah found favour in the \textsc{Lord}'s
eyes.

\hypertarget{call-of-noah-and-the-building-of-the-ark}{%
\subsection{Call of Noah and the building of the
ark}\label{call-of-noah-and-the-building-of-the-ark}}

\bibleverse{9} This is the history of the generations of Noah: Noah was
a righteous man, blameless amongst the people of his time. Noah walked
with God. \bibleverse{10} Noah became the father of three sons: Shem,
Ham, and Japheth. \bibleverse{11} The earth was corrupt before God, and
the earth was filled with violence. \bibleverse{12} God saw the earth,
and saw that it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted their way on
the earth. \bibleverse{13} God said to Noah, ``I will bring an end to
all flesh, for the earth is filled with violence through them. Behold, I
will destroy them and the earth. \bibleverse{14} Make a ship of gopher
wood. You shall make rooms in the ship, and shall seal it inside and
outside with pitch. \bibleverse{15} This is how you shall make it. The
length of the ship shall be three hundred cubits,\footnote{\textbf{6:15}
  A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow
  on a man's arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimetres.} its width fifty
cubits, and its height thirty cubits. \bibleverse{16} You shall make a
roof in the ship, and you shall finish it to a cubit upward. You shall
set the door of the ship in its side. You shall make it with lower,
second, and third levels. \bibleverse{17} I, even I, will bring the
flood of waters on this earth, to destroy all flesh having the breath of
life from under the sky. Everything that is in the earth will die.
\bibleverse{18} But I will establish my covenant with you. You shall
come into the ship, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons' wives with
you. \bibleverse{19} Of every living thing of all flesh, you shall bring
two of every sort into the ship, to keep them alive with you. They shall
be male and female. \bibleverse{20} Of the birds after their kind, of
the livestock after their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground
after its kind, two of every sort will come to you, to keep them alive.
\bibleverse{21} Take with you some of all food that is eaten, and gather
it to yourself; and it will be for food for you, and for them.''
\bibleverse{22} Thus Noah did. He did all that God commanded him.

\hypertarget{the-flood.-noah-enters-the-ark}{%
\subsection{The flood. Noah enters the
ark}\label{the-flood.-noah-enters-the-ark}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} The \textsc{Lord} said to Noah, ``Come with all of your
household into the ship, for I have seen your righteousness before me in
this generation. \bibleverse{2} You shall take seven pairs of every
clean animal with you, the male and his female. Of the animals that are
not clean, take two, the male and his female. \bibleverse{3} Also of the
birds of the sky, seven and seven, male and female, to keep seed alive
on the surface of all the earth. \bibleverse{4} In seven days, I will
cause it to rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights. I will
destroy every living thing that I have made from the surface of the
ground.'' \bibleverse{5} Noah did everything that the \textsc{Lord}
commanded him. \bibleverse{6} Noah was six hundred years old when the
flood of waters came on the earth. \bibleverse{7} Noah went into the
ship with his sons, his wife, and his sons' wives, because of the
floodwaters. \bibleverse{8} Clean animals, unclean animals, birds, and
everything that creeps on the ground \bibleverse{9} went by pairs to
Noah into the ship, male and female, as God commanded Noah.
\bibleverse{10} After the seven days, the floodwaters came on the earth.

\hypertarget{the-rise-of-the-deluge}{%
\subsection{The rise of the deluge}\label{the-rise-of-the-deluge}}

\bibleverse{11} In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second
month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on that day all the
fountains of the great deep burst open, and the sky's windows opened.
\bibleverse{12} It rained on the earth forty days and forty nights.
\bibleverse{13} In the same day Noah, and Shem, Ham, and Japheth---the
sons of Noah---and Noah's wife and the three wives of his sons with
them, entered into the ship--- \bibleverse{14} they, and every animal
after its kind, all the livestock after their kind, every creeping thing
that creeps on the earth after its kind, and every bird after its kind,
every bird of every sort. \bibleverse{15} Pairs from all flesh with the
breath of life in them went into the ship to Noah. \bibleverse{16} Those
who went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God commanded him;
then the \textsc{Lord} shut him in. \bibleverse{17} The flood was forty
days on the earth. The waters increased, and lifted up the ship, and it
was lifted up above the earth. \bibleverse{18} The waters rose, and
increased greatly on the earth; and the ship floated on the surface of
the waters. \bibleverse{19} The waters rose very high on the earth. All
the high mountains that were under the whole sky were covered.
\bibleverse{20} The waters rose fifteen cubits\footnote{\textbf{7:20} A
  cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on
  a man's arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimetres.} higher, and the
mountains were covered. \bibleverse{21} All flesh died that moved on the
earth, including birds, livestock, animals, every creeping thing that
creeps on the earth, and every man. \bibleverse{22} All on the dry land,
in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, died.
\bibleverse{23} Every living thing was destroyed that was on the surface
of the ground, including man, livestock, creeping things, and birds of
the sky. They were destroyed from the earth. Only Noah was left, and
those who were with him in the ship. \bibleverse{24} The waters flooded
the earth one hundred and fifty days.

\hypertarget{the-end-of-the-flood}{%
\subsection{The end of the flood}\label{the-end-of-the-flood}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} God remembered Noah, all the animals, and all the
livestock that were with him in the ship; and God made a wind to pass
over the earth. The waters subsided. \bibleverse{2} The deep's fountains
and the sky's windows were also stopped, and the rain from the sky was
restrained. \bibleverse{3} The waters continually receded from the
earth. After the end of one hundred and fifty days the waters receded.
\bibleverse{4} The ship rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth
day of the month, on Ararat's mountains. \bibleverse{5} The waters
receded continually until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the
first day of the month, the tops of the mountains were visible.
\bibleverse{6} At the end of forty days, Noah opened the window of the
ship which he had made, \bibleverse{7} and he sent out a raven. It went
back and forth, until the waters were dried up from the earth.
\bibleverse{8} He himself sent out a dove to see if the waters were
abated from the surface of the ground, \bibleverse{9} but the dove found
no place to rest her foot, and she returned into the ship to him, for
the waters were on the surface of the whole earth. He put out his hand,
and took her, and brought her to him into the ship. \bibleverse{10} He
waited yet another seven days; and again he sent the dove out of the
ship. \bibleverse{11} The dove came back to him at evening and, behold,
in her mouth was a freshly plucked olive leaf. So Noah knew that the
waters were abated from the earth. \bibleverse{12} He waited yet another
seven days, and sent out the dove; and she didn't return to him any
more. \bibleverse{13} In the six hundred first year, in the first month,
the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from the earth.
Noah removed the covering of the ship, and looked. He saw that the
surface of the ground was dry. \bibleverse{14} In the second month, on
the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth was dry. \bibleverse{15}
God spoke to Noah, saying, \bibleverse{16} ``Go out of the ship, you,
your wife, your sons, and your sons' wives with you. \bibleverse{17}
Bring out with you every living thing that is with you of all flesh,
including birds, livestock, and every creeping thing that creeps on the
earth, that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and
multiply on the earth.'' \bibleverse{18} Noah went out, with his sons,
his wife, and his sons' wives with him. \bibleverse{19} Every animal,
every creeping thing, and every bird, whatever moves on the earth, after
their families, went out of the ship.

\hypertarget{noahs-holocaust-and-gods-promise}{%
\subsection{Noah's holocaust and God's
promise}\label{noahs-holocaust-and-gods-promise}}

\bibleverse{20} Noah built an altar to the \textsc{Lord}, and took of
every clean animal, and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings
on the altar. \bibleverse{21} The \textsc{Lord} smelled the pleasant
aroma. The \textsc{Lord} said in his heart, ``I will not again curse the
ground any more for man's sake because the imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth. I will never again strike every living thing, as I
have done. \bibleverse{22} While the earth remains, seed time and
harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night
will not cease.''

\hypertarget{creation-blessing-renewal}{%
\subsection{Creation Blessing Renewal}\label{creation-blessing-renewal}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, ``Be
fruitful, multiply, and replenish the earth. \bibleverse{2} The fear of
you and the dread of you will be on every animal of the earth, and on
every bird of the sky. Everything that moves along the ground, and all
the fish of the sea, are delivered into your hand. \bibleverse{3} Every
moving thing that lives will be food for you. As I gave you the green
herb, I have given everything to you. \bibleverse{4} But flesh with its
life, that is, its blood, you shall not eat. \bibleverse{5} I will
surely require accounting for your life's blood. At the hand of every
animal I will require it. At the hand of man, even at the hand of every
man's brother, I will require the life of man. \bibleverse{6} Whoever
sheds man's blood, his blood will be shed by man, for God made man in
his own image. \bibleverse{7} Be fruitful and multiply. Increase
abundantly in the earth, and multiply in it.''

\hypertarget{the-covenant-between-god-and-noah-and-creation}{%
\subsection{The covenant between God and Noah and
creation}\label{the-covenant-between-god-and-noah-and-creation}}

\bibleverse{8} God spoke to Noah and to his sons with him, saying,
\bibleverse{9} ``As for me, behold, I establish my covenant with you,
and with your offspring after you, \bibleverse{10} and with every living
creature that is with you: the birds, the livestock, and every animal of
the earth with you, of all that go out of the ship, even every animal of
the earth. \bibleverse{11} I will establish my covenant with you: All
flesh will not be cut off any more by the waters of the flood. There
will never again be a flood to destroy the earth.'' \bibleverse{12} God
said, ``This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and
you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual
generations: \bibleverse{13} I set my rainbow in the cloud, and it will
be a sign of a covenant between me and the earth. \bibleverse{14} When I
bring a cloud over the earth, that the rainbow will be seen in the
cloud, \bibleverse{15} I will remember my covenant, which is between me
and you and every living creature of all flesh, and the waters will no
more become a flood to destroy all flesh. \bibleverse{16} The rainbow
will be in the cloud. I will look at it, that I may remember the
everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh
that is on the earth.'' \bibleverse{17} God said to Noah, ``This is the
token of the covenant which I have established between me and all flesh
that is on the earth.''

\hypertarget{noahs-drunkenness}{%
\subsection{Noah's Drunkenness}\label{noahs-drunkenness}}

\bibleverse{18} The sons of Noah who went out from the ship were Shem,
Ham, and Japheth. Ham is the father of Canaan. \bibleverse{19} These
three were the sons of Noah, and from these the whole earth was
populated. \bibleverse{20} Noah began to be a farmer, and planted a
vineyard. \bibleverse{21} He drank of the wine and got drunk. He was
uncovered within his tent. \bibleverse{22} Ham, the father of Canaan,
saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brothers outside.
\bibleverse{23} Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it on both
their shoulders, went in backwards, and covered the nakedness of their
father. Their faces were backwards, and they didn't see their father's
nakedness. \bibleverse{24} Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his
youngest son had done to him. \bibleverse{25} He said, ``Canaan is
cursed. He will be a servant of servants to his brothers.''
\bibleverse{26} He said, ``Blessed be the \textsc{Lord}, the God of
Shem. Let Canaan be his servant. \bibleverse{27} May God enlarge
Japheth. Let him dwell in the tents of Shem. Let Canaan be his
servant.'' \bibleverse{28} Noah lived three hundred and fifty years
after the flood. \bibleverse{29} All the days of Noah were nine hundred
and fifty years, and then he died.

\hypertarget{the-descendants-of-the-sons-of-noah}{%
\subsection{The descendants of the sons of
Noah}\label{the-descendants-of-the-sons-of-noah}}

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Now this is the history of the generations of the sons of
Noah and of Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Sons were born to them after the
flood. \bibleverse{2} The sons of Japheth were: Gomer, Magog, Madai,
Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras. \bibleverse{3} The sons of Gomer were:
Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah. \bibleverse{4} The sons of Javan were:
Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. \bibleverse{5} Of these were the
islands of the nations divided in their lands, everyone after his
language, after their families, in their nations. \bibleverse{6} The
sons of Ham were: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. \bibleverse{7} The
sons of Cush were: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons
of Raamah were: Sheba and Dedan. \bibleverse{8} Cush became the father
of Nimrod. He began to be a mighty one in the earth. \bibleverse{9} He
was a mighty hunter before the \textsc{Lord}. Therefore it is said,
``like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the \textsc{Lord}''.
\bibleverse{10} The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad,
and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. \bibleverse{11} Out of that land he
went into Assyria, and built Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah,
\bibleverse{12} and Resen between Nineveh and the great city Calah.
\bibleverse{13} Mizraim became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim,
Naphtuhim, \bibleverse{14} Pathrusim, Casluhim (which the Philistines
descended from), and Caphtorim. \bibleverse{15} Canaan became the father
of Sidon (his firstborn), Heth, \bibleverse{16} the Jebusites, the
Amorites, the Girgashites, \bibleverse{17} the Hivites, the Arkites, the
Sinites, \bibleverse{18} the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the
Hamathites. Afterward the families of the Canaanites were spread abroad.
\bibleverse{19} The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon---as you go
towards Gerar---to Gaza---as you go towards Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and
Zeboiim---to Lasha. \bibleverse{20} These are the sons of Ham, after
their families, according to their languages, in their lands and their
nations. \bibleverse{21} Children were also born to Shem (the elder
brother of Japheth), the father of all the children of Eber.
\bibleverse{22} The sons of Shem were: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud,
and Aram. \bibleverse{23} The sons of Aram were: Uz, Hul, Gether, and
Mash. \bibleverse{24} Arpachshad became the father of Shelah. Shelah
became the father of Eber. \bibleverse{25} To Eber were born two sons.
The name of the one was Peleg, for in his days the earth was divided.
His brother's name was Joktan. \bibleverse{26} Joktan became the father
of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, \bibleverse{27} Hadoram, Uzal,
Diklah, \bibleverse{28} Obal, Abimael, Sheba, \bibleverse{29} Ophir,
Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan. \bibleverse{30}
Their dwelling extended from Mesha, as you go towards Sephar, the
mountain of the east. \bibleverse{31} These are the sons of Shem, by
their families, according to their languages, lands, and nations.
\bibleverse{32} These are the families of the sons of Noah, by their
generations, according to their nations. The nations divided from these
in the earth after the flood.

\hypertarget{babels-tower}{%
\subsection{Babel's tower}\label{babels-tower}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} The whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
\bibleverse{2} As they travelled east,\footnote{\textbf{11:2} LXX reads
  ``from the east''.} they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they
lived there. \bibleverse{3} They said to one another, ``Come, let's make
bricks, and burn them thoroughly.'' They had brick for stone, and they
used tar for mortar. \bibleverse{4} They said, ``Come, let's build
ourselves a city, and a tower whose top reaches to the sky, and let's
make a name for ourselves, lest we be scattered abroad on the surface of
the whole earth.'' \bibleverse{5} The \textsc{Lord} came down to see the
city and the tower, which the children of men built. \bibleverse{6} The
\textsc{Lord} said, ``Behold, they are one people, and they all have one
language, and this is what they begin to do. Now nothing will be
withheld from them, which they intend to do. \bibleverse{7} Come, let's
go down, and there confuse their language, that they may not understand
one another's speech.'' \bibleverse{8} So the \textsc{Lord} scattered
them abroad from there on the surface of all the earth. They stopped
building the city. \bibleverse{9} Therefore its name was called Babel,
because there the \textsc{Lord} confused the language of all the earth.
From there, the \textsc{Lord} scattered them abroad on the surface of
all the earth.

\hypertarget{descendants-of-shem}{%
\subsection{Descendants of Shem}\label{descendants-of-shem}}

\bibleverse{10} This is the history of the generations of Shem: Shem was
one hundred years old when he became the father of Arpachshad two years
after the flood. \bibleverse{11} Shem lived five hundred years after he
became the father of Arpachshad, and became the father of more sons and
daughters. \bibleverse{12} Arpachshad lived thirty-five years and became
the father of Shelah. \bibleverse{13} Arpachshad lived four hundred and
three years after he became the father of Shelah, and became the father
of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{14} Shelah lived thirty years,
and became the father of Eber. \bibleverse{15} Shelah lived four hundred
and three years after he became the father of Eber, and became the
father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{16} Eber lived
thirty-four years, and became the father of Peleg. \bibleverse{17} Eber
lived four hundred and thirty years after he became the father of Peleg,
and became the father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{18} Peleg
lived thirty years, and became the father of Reu. \bibleverse{19} Peleg
lived two hundred and nine years after he became the father of Reu, and
became the father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{20} Reu lived
thirty-two years, and became the father of Serug. \bibleverse{21} Reu
lived two hundred and seven years after he became the father of Serug,
and became the father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{22} Serug
lived thirty years, and became the father of Nahor. \bibleverse{23}
Serug lived two hundred years after he became the father of Nahor, and
became the father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{24} Nahor
lived twenty-nine years, and became the father of Terah. \bibleverse{25}
Nahor lived one hundred and nineteen years after he became the father of
Terah, and became the father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{26}
Terah lived seventy years, and became the father of Abram, Nahor, and
Haran.

\hypertarget{descendants-of-thare}{%
\subsection{Descendants of Thare}\label{descendants-of-thare}}

\bibleverse{27} Now this is the history of the generations of Terah.
Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Haran became the
father of Lot. \bibleverse{28} Haran died in the land of his birth, in
Ur of the Chaldees, while his father Terah was still alive.
\bibleverse{29} Abram and Nahor married wives. The name of Abram's wife
was Sarai, and the name of Nahor's wife was Milcah, the daughter of
Haran, who was also the father of Iscah. \bibleverse{30} Sarai was
barren. She had no child. \bibleverse{31} Terah took Abram his son, Lot
the son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son
Abram's wife. They went from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of
Canaan. They came to Haran and lived there. \bibleverse{32} The days of
Terah were two hundred and five years. Terah died in Haran.

\hypertarget{abrams-call}{%
\subsection{Abram's call}\label{abrams-call}}

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Now the \textsc{Lord} said to Abram, ``Leave your
country, and your relatives, and your father's house, and go to the land
that I will show you. \bibleverse{2} I will make of you a great nation.
I will bless you and make your name great. You will be a blessing.
\bibleverse{3} I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him
who treats you with contempt. All the families of the earth will be
blessed through you.''

\hypertarget{abrams-immigration-to-canaan}{%
\subsection{Abram's Immigration to
Canaan}\label{abrams-immigration-to-canaan}}

\bibleverse{4} So Abram went, as the \textsc{Lord} had told him. Lot
went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from
Haran. \bibleverse{5} Abram took Sarai his wife, Lot his brother's son,
all their possessions that they had gathered, and the people whom they
had acquired in Haran, and they went to go into the land of Canaan. They
entered into the land of Canaan. \bibleverse{6} Abram passed through the
land to the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. At that time,
Canaanites were in the land. \bibleverse{7} The \textsc{Lord} appeared
to Abram and said, ``I will give this land to your
offspring.''\footnote{\textbf{12:7} or, seed} He built an altar there to
the \textsc{Lord}, who had appeared to him. \bibleverse{8} He left from
there to go to the mountain on the east of Bethel and pitched his tent,
having Bethel on the west, and Ai on the east. There he built an altar
to the \textsc{Lord} and called on the \textsc{Lord}'s name.
\bibleverse{9} Abram travelled, still going on towards the South.

\hypertarget{abram-and-sarai-in-egypt}{%
\subsection{Abram and Sarai in Egypt}\label{abram-and-sarai-in-egypt}}

\bibleverse{10} There was a famine in the land. Abram went down into
Egypt to live as a foreigner there, for the famine was severe in the
land. \bibleverse{11} When he had come near to enter Egypt, he said to
Sarai his wife, ``See now, I know that you are a beautiful woman to look
at. \bibleverse{12} It will happen that when the Egyptians see you, they
will say, `This is his wife.' They will kill me, but they will save you
alive. \bibleverse{13} Please say that you are my sister, that it may be
well with me for your sake, and that my soul may live because of you.''
\bibleverse{14} When Abram had come into Egypt, Egyptians saw that the
woman was very beautiful. \bibleverse{15} The princes of Pharaoh saw
her, and praised her to Pharaoh; and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's
house. \bibleverse{16} He dealt well with Abram for her sake. He had
sheep, cattle, male donkeys, male servants, female servants, female
donkeys, and camels. \bibleverse{17} The \textsc{Lord} afflicted Pharaoh
and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
\bibleverse{18} Pharaoh called Abram and said, ``What is this that you
have done to me? Why didn't you tell me that she was your wife?
\bibleverse{19} Why did you say, `She is my sister,' so that I took her
to be my wife? Now therefore, see your wife, take her, and go your
way.'' \bibleverse{20} Pharaoh commanded men concerning him, and they
escorted him away with his wife and all that he had.

\hypertarget{abrams-return}{%
\subsection{Abram's Return}\label{abrams-return}}

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Abram went up out of Egypt---he, his wife, all that he
had, and Lot with him---into the South. \bibleverse{2} Abram was very
rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold. \bibleverse{3} He went on his
journeys from the South as far as Bethel, to the place where his tent
had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, \bibleverse{4} to the
place of the altar, which he had made there at the first. There Abram
called on the \textsc{Lord}'s name.

\hypertarget{abram-separates-from-lot}{%
\subsection{Abram separates from Lot}\label{abram-separates-from-lot}}

\bibleverse{5} Lot also, who went with Abram, had flocks, herds, and
tents. \bibleverse{6} The land was not able to bear them, that they
might live together; for their possessions were so great that they
couldn't live together. \bibleverse{7} There was strife between the
herdsmen of Abram's livestock and the herdsmen of Lot's livestock. The
Canaanites and the Perizzites lived in the land at that time.
\bibleverse{8} Abram said to Lot, ``Please, let there be no strife
between you and me, and between your herdsmen and my herdsmen; for we
are relatives. \bibleverse{9} Isn't the whole land before you? Please
separate yourself from me. If you go to the left hand, then I will go to
the right. Or if you go to the right hand, then I will go to the left.''

\hypertarget{lots-departure-through-the-jordan-valley}{%
\subsection{Lot's departure through the Jordan
Valley}\label{lots-departure-through-the-jordan-valley}}

\bibleverse{10} Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw all the plain of the
Jordan, that it was well-watered everywhere, before the \textsc{Lord}
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, like the garden of the \textsc{Lord}, like
the land of Egypt, as you go to Zoar. \bibleverse{11} So Lot chose the
Plain of the Jordan for himself. Lot travelled east, and they separated
themselves from one other. \bibleverse{12} Abram lived in the land of
Canaan, and Lot lived in the cities of the plain, and moved his tent as
far as Sodom. \bibleverse{13} Now the men of Sodom were exceedingly
wicked and sinners against the \textsc{Lord}.

\hypertarget{god-promises-abram-the-land-of-canaan}{%
\subsection{God promises Abram the land of
Canaan}\label{god-promises-abram-the-land-of-canaan}}

\bibleverse{14} The \textsc{Lord} said to Abram, after Lot was separated
from him, ``Now, lift up your eyes, and look from the place where you
are, northward and southward and eastward and westward, \bibleverse{15}
for I will give all the land which you see to you and to your offspring
forever. \bibleverse{16} I will make your offspring as the dust of the
earth, so that if a man can count the dust of the earth, then your
offspring may also be counted. \bibleverse{17} Arise, walk through the
land in its length and in its width; for I will give it to you.''
\bibleverse{18} Abram moved his tent, and came and lived by the oaks of
Mamre, which are in Hebron, and built an altar there to the
\textsc{Lord}.

\hypertarget{war-of-king-chedorlaomer-in-the-jordan-valley}{%
\subsection{War of King Chedorlaomer in the Jordan
Valley}\label{war-of-king-chedorlaomer-in-the-jordan-valley}}

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} In the days of Amraphel, king of Shinar; Arioch, king of
Ellasar; Chedorlaomer, king of Elam; and Tidal, king of Goiim,
\bibleverse{2} they made war with Bera, king of Sodom; Birsha, king of
Gomorrah; Shinab, king of Admah; Shemeber, king of Zeboiim; and the king
of Bela (also called Zoar). \bibleverse{3} All these joined together in
the valley of Siddim (also called the Salt Sea). \bibleverse{4} They
served Chedorlaomer for twelve years, and in the thirteenth year they
rebelled. \bibleverse{5} In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer and the
kings who were with him came and struck the Rephaim in Ashteroth
Karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh Kiriathaim, \bibleverse{6}
and the Horites in their Mount Seir, to El Paran, which is by the
wilderness. \bibleverse{7} They returned, and came to En Mishpat (also
called Kadesh), and struck all the country of the Amalekites, and also
the Amorites, that lived in Hazazon Tamar. \bibleverse{8} The king of
Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim,
and the king of Bela (also called Zoar) went out; and they set the
battle in array against them in the valley of Siddim \bibleverse{9}
against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of
Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings against the five.
\bibleverse{10} Now the valley of Siddim was full of tar pits; and the
kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and some fell there. Those who
remained fled to the hills. \bibleverse{11} They took all the goods of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food, and went their way.
\bibleverse{12} They took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who lived in
Sodom, and his goods, and departed.

\hypertarget{help-of-abram-by-lot}{%
\subsection{Help of Abram by Lot}\label{help-of-abram-by-lot}}

\bibleverse{13} One who had escaped came and told Abram, the Hebrew. At
that time, he lived by the oaks of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eshcol
and brother of Aner. They were allies of Abram. \bibleverse{14} When
Abram heard that his relative was taken captive, he led out his three
hundred and eighteen trained men, born in his house, and pursued as far
as Dan. \bibleverse{15} He divided himself against them by night, he and
his servants, and struck them, and pursued them to Hobah, which is on
the left hand of Damascus. \bibleverse{16} He brought back all the
goods, and also brought back his relative Lot and his goods, and the
women also, and the other people.

\hypertarget{abram-meets-melchizedek-king-of-salem}{%
\subsection{Abram meets Melchizedek, king of
Salem}\label{abram-meets-melchizedek-king-of-salem}}

\bibleverse{17} The king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return
from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, at
the valley of Shaveh (that is, the King's Valley). \bibleverse{18}
Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine. He was priest of
God Most High. \bibleverse{19} He blessed him, and said, ``Blessed be
Abram of God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth. \bibleverse{20}
Blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into your
hand.'' Abram gave him a tenth of all.

\hypertarget{abrams-humility-with-the-king-of-sodom}{%
\subsection{Abram's humility with the king of
Sodom}\label{abrams-humility-with-the-king-of-sodom}}

\bibleverse{21} The king of Sodom said to Abram, ``Give me the people,
and take the goods for yourself.'' \bibleverse{22} Abram said to the
king of Sodom, ``I have lifted up my hand to the \textsc{Lord}, God Most
High, possessor of heaven and earth, \bibleverse{23} that I will not
take a thread nor a sandal strap nor anything that is yours, lest you
should say, `I have made Abram rich.' \bibleverse{24} I will accept
nothing from you except that which the young men have eaten, and the
portion of the men who went with me: Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. Let them
take their portion.''

\hypertarget{god-promises-abram-a-son}{%
\subsection{God promises Abram a son}\label{god-promises-abram-a-son}}

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things the \textsc{Lord}'s word came to Abram
in a vision, saying, ``Don't be afraid, Abram. I am your shield, your
exceedingly great reward.'' \bibleverse{2} Abram said, ``Lord\footnote{\textbf{15:2}
  The word translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai''.} GOD, what will you give
me, since I go childless, and he who will inherit my estate is Eliezer
of Damascus?'' \bibleverse{3} Abram said, ``Behold, you have given no
children to me: and, behold, one born in my house is my heir.''
\bibleverse{4} Behold, the \textsc{Lord}'s word came to him, saying,
``This man will not be your heir, but he who will come out of your own
body will be your heir.'' \bibleverse{5} The \textsc{Lord} brought him
outside, and said, ``Look now towards the sky, and count the stars, if
you are able to count them.'' He said to Abram, ``So your offspring will
be.'' \bibleverse{6} He believed in the \textsc{Lord}, who credited it
to him for righteousness.

\hypertarget{god-confirm-his-promise}{%
\subsection{God confirm his promise}\label{god-confirm-his-promise}}

\bibleverse{7} He said to Abram, ``I am the \textsc{Lord} who brought
you out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give you this land to inherit it.''
\bibleverse{8} He said, ``Lord GOD, how will I know that I will inherit
it?'' \bibleverse{9} He said to him, ``Bring me a heifer three years
old, a female goat three years old, a ram three years old, a turtledove,
and a young pigeon.'' \bibleverse{10} He brought him all these, and
divided them in the middle, and laid each half opposite the other; but
he didn't divide the birds. \bibleverse{11} The birds of prey came down
on the carcasses, and Abram drove them away. \bibleverse{12} When the
sun was going down, a deep sleep fell on Abram. Now terror and great
darkness fell on him. \bibleverse{13} He said to Abram, ``Know for sure
that your offspring will live as foreigners in a land that is not
theirs, and will serve them. They will afflict them four hundred years.
\bibleverse{14} I will also judge that nation, whom they will serve.
Afterward they will come out with great wealth; \bibleverse{15} but you
will go to your fathers in peace. You will be buried at a good old age.
\bibleverse{16} In the fourth generation they will come here again, for
the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.'' \bibleverse{17} It came
to pass that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold, a smoking
furnace and a flaming torch passed between these pieces. \bibleverse{18}
In that day the \textsc{Lord} made a covenant with Abram, saying, ``I
have given this land to your offspring, from the river of Egypt to the
great river, the river Euphrates: \bibleverse{19} the land of the
Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, \bibleverse{20} the Hittites,
the Perizzites, the Rephaim, \bibleverse{21} the Amorites, the
Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.''

\hypertarget{sarai-gives-her-servant-hagar-as-a-wife-to-abram}{%
\subsection{Sarai gives her servant Hagar as a wife to
Abram}\label{sarai-gives-her-servant-hagar-as-a-wife-to-abram}}

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no children. She had a
servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar. \bibleverse{2} Sarai said to
Abram, ``See now, the \textsc{Lord} has restrained me from bearing.
Please go in to my servant. It may be that I will obtain children by
her.'' Abram listened to the voice of Sarai. \bibleverse{3} Sarai,
Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her servant, after Abram had
lived ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to Abram her husband
to be his wife. \bibleverse{4} He went in to Hagar, and she conceived.
When she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her
eyes. \bibleverse{5} Sarai said to Abram, ``This wrong is your fault. I
gave my servant into your bosom, and when she saw that she had
conceived, she despised me. May The \textsc{Lord} judge between me and
you.'' \bibleverse{6} But Abram said to Sarai, ``Behold, your maid is in
your hand. Do to her whatever is good in your eyes.'' Sarai dealt
harshly with her, and she fled from her face.

\hypertarget{god-appears-to-hagar-at-a-spring-of-water-in-the-desert}{%
\subsection{God appears to Hagar at a spring of water in the
desert}\label{god-appears-to-hagar-at-a-spring-of-water-in-the-desert}}

\bibleverse{7} The \textsc{Lord}'s angel found her by a fountain of
water in the wilderness, by the fountain on the way to Shur.
\bibleverse{8} He said, ``Hagar, Sarai's servant, where did you come
from? Where are you going?'' She said, ``I am fleeing from the face of
my mistress Sarai.'' \bibleverse{9} The \textsc{Lord}'s angel said to
her, ``Return to your mistress, and submit yourself under her hands.''
\bibleverse{10} The \textsc{Lord}'s angel said to her, ``I will greatly
multiply your offspring, that they will not be counted for multitude.''
\bibleverse{11} The \textsc{Lord}'s angel said to her, ``Behold, you are
with child, and will bear a son. You shall call his name Ishmael,
because the \textsc{Lord} has heard your affliction. \bibleverse{12} He
will be like a wild donkey amongst men. His hand will be against every
man, and every man's hand against him. He will live opposed to all of
his brothers.'' \bibleverse{13} She called the name of the \textsc{Lord}
who spoke to her, ``You are a God who sees,'' for she said, ``Have I
even stayed alive after seeing him?'' \bibleverse{14} Therefore the well
was called Beer Lahai Roi.\footnote{\textbf{16:14} Beer Lahai Roi means
  ``well of the one who lives and sees me''.} Behold, it is between
Kadesh and Bered. \bibleverse{15} Hagar bore a son for Abram. Abram
called the name of his son, whom Hagar bore, Ishmael. \bibleverse{16}
Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram.

\hypertarget{god-confirms-his-covenant-with-abram}{%
\subsection{God confirms his covenant with
Abram}\label{god-confirms-his-covenant-with-abram}}

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the \textsc{Lord}
appeared to Abram and said to him, ``I am God Almighty. Walk before me
and be blameless. \bibleverse{2} I will make my covenant between me and
you, and will multiply you exceedingly.'' \bibleverse{3} Abram fell on
his face. God talked with him, saying, \bibleverse{4} ``As for me,
behold, my covenant is with you. You will be the father of a multitude
of nations. \bibleverse{5} Your name will no more be called Abram, but
your name will be Abraham; for I have made you the father of a multitude
of nations. \bibleverse{6} I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I
will make nations of you. Kings will come out of you. \bibleverse{7} I
will establish my covenant between me and you and your offspring after
you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a
God to you and to your offspring after you. \bibleverse{8} I will give
to you, and to your offspring after you, the land where you are
travelling, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession. I
will be their God.''

\hypertarget{circumcision}{%
\subsection{Circumcision}\label{circumcision}}

\bibleverse{9} God said to Abraham, ``As for you, you shall keep my
covenant, you and your offspring after you throughout their generations.
\bibleverse{10} This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me
and you and your offspring after you. Every male amongst you shall be
circumcised. \bibleverse{11} You shall be circumcised in the flesh of
your foreskin. It will be a token of the covenant between me and you.
\bibleverse{12} He who is eight days old shall be circumcised amongst
you, every male throughout your generations, he who is born in the
house, or bought with money from any foreigner who is not of your
offspring. \bibleverse{13} He who is born in your house, and he who is
bought with your money, must be circumcised. My covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting covenant. \bibleverse{14} The
uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin,
that soul shall be cut off from his people. He has broken my covenant.''

\hypertarget{god-promises-abraham-a-son-by-sarah}{%
\subsection{God promises Abraham a son by
Sarah}\label{god-promises-abraham-a-son-by-sarah}}

\bibleverse{15} God said to Abraham, ``As for Sarai your wife, you shall
not call her name Sarai, but her name shall be Sarah. \bibleverse{16} I
will bless her, and moreover I will give you a son by her. Yes, I will
bless her, and she will be a mother of nations. Kings of peoples will
come from her.'' \bibleverse{17} Then Abraham fell on his face, and
laughed, and said in his heart, ``Will a child be born to him who is one
hundred years old? Will Sarah, who is ninety years old, give birth?''
\bibleverse{18} Abraham said to God, ``Oh that Ishmael might live before
you!'' \bibleverse{19} God said, ``No, but Sarah, your wife, will bear
you a son. You shall call his name Isaac.\footnote{\textbf{17:19} Isaac
  means ``he laughs''.} I will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant for his offspring after him. \bibleverse{20} As for
Ishmael, I have heard you. Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him
fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly. He will become the father
of twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation. \bibleverse{21}
But I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you
at this set time next year.'' \bibleverse{22} When he finished talking
with him, God went up from Abraham.

\hypertarget{abraham-performs-the-circumcision}{%
\subsection{Abraham performs the
circumcision}\label{abraham-performs-the-circumcision}}

\bibleverse{23} Abraham took Ishmael his son, all who were born in his
house, and all who were bought with his money: every male amongst the
men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
the same day, as God had said to him. \bibleverse{24} Abraham was
ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin. \bibleverse{25} Ishmael, his son, was thirteen years old when
he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. \bibleverse{26} In the
same day both Abraham and Ishmael, his son, were circumcised.
\bibleverse{27} All the men of his house, those born in the house, and
those bought with money from a foreigner, were circumcised with him.

\hypertarget{god-visits-abraham}{%
\subsection{God visits Abraham}\label{god-visits-abraham}}

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} The \textsc{Lord} appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre,
as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day. \bibleverse{2} He
lifted up his eyes and looked, and saw that three men stood near him.
When he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed
himself to the earth, \bibleverse{3} and said, ``My lord, if now I have
found favour in your sight, please don't go away from your servant.
\bibleverse{4} Now let a little water be fetched, wash your feet, and
rest yourselves under the tree. \bibleverse{5} I will get a piece of
bread so you can refresh your heart. After that you may go your way, now
that you have come to your servant.'' They said, ``Very well, do as you
have said.'' \bibleverse{6} Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah, and
said, ``Quickly prepare three seahs\footnote{\textbf{18:6} 1 seah is
  about 7 litres or 1.9 gallons or 0.8 pecks} of fine meal, knead it,
and make cakes.'' \bibleverse{7} Abraham ran to the herd, and fetched a
tender and good calf, and gave it to the servant. He hurried to dress
it. \bibleverse{8} He took butter, milk, and the calf which he had
dressed, and set it before them. He stood by them under the tree, and
they ate. \bibleverse{9} They asked him, ``Where is Sarah, your wife?''
He said, ``There, in the tent.'' \bibleverse{10} He said, ``I will
certainly return to you at about this time next year; and behold, Sarah
your wife will have a son.'' Sarah heard in the tent door, which was
behind him. \bibleverse{11} Now Abraham and Sarah were old, well
advanced in age. Sarah had passed the age of childbearing.
\bibleverse{12} Sarah laughed within herself, saying, ``After I have
grown old will I have pleasure, my lord being old also?''
\bibleverse{13} The \textsc{Lord} said to Abraham, ``Why did Sarah
laugh, saying, `Will I really bear a child when I am old?'
\bibleverse{14} Is anything too hard for the \textsc{Lord}? At the set
time I will return to you, when the season comes around, and Sarah will
have a son.'' \bibleverse{15} Then Sarah denied it, saying, ``I didn't
laugh,'' for she was afraid. He said, ``No, but you did laugh.''

\hypertarget{abrahams-intercession-for-sodom}{%
\subsection{Abraham's intercession for
Sodom}\label{abrahams-intercession-for-sodom}}

\bibleverse{16} The men rose up from there, and looked towards Sodom.
Abraham went with them to see them on their way. \bibleverse{17} The
\textsc{Lord} said, ``Will I hide from Abraham what I do,
\bibleverse{18} since Abraham will surely become a great and mighty
nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed in him?
\bibleverse{19} For I have known him, to the end that he may command his
children and his household after him, that they may keep the way of the
\textsc{Lord}, to do righteousness and justice; to the end that the
\textsc{Lord} may bring on Abraham that which he has spoken of him.''
\bibleverse{20} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous,
\bibleverse{21} I will go down now, and see whether their deeds are as
bad as the reports which have come to me. If not, I will know.''
\bibleverse{22} The men turned from there, and went towards Sodom, but
Abraham stood yet before the \textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{23} Abraham came
near, and said, ``Will you consume the righteous with the wicked?
\bibleverse{24} What if there are fifty righteous within the city? Will
you consume and not spare the place for the fifty righteous who are in
it? \bibleverse{25} May it be far from you to do things like that, to
kill the righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous should be like
the wicked. May that be far from you. Shouldn't the Judge of all the
earth do right?'' \bibleverse{26} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``If I find in
Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare the whole place
for their sake.'' \bibleverse{27} Abraham answered, ``See now, I have
taken it on myself to speak to the Lord, although I am dust and ashes.
\bibleverse{28} What if there will lack five of the fifty righteous?
Will you destroy all the city for lack of five?'' He said, ``I will not
destroy it if I find forty-five there.'' \bibleverse{29} He spoke to him
yet again, and said, ``What if there are forty found there?'' He said,
``I will not do it for the forty's sake.'' \bibleverse{30} He said, ``Oh
don't let the Lord be angry, and I will speak. What if there are thirty
found there?'' He said, ``I will not do it if I find thirty there.''
\bibleverse{31} He said, ``See now, I have taken it on myself to speak
to the Lord. What if there are twenty found there?'' He said, ``I will
not destroy it for the twenty's sake.'' \bibleverse{32} He said, ``Oh
don't let the Lord be angry, and I will speak just once more. What if
ten are found there?'' He said, ``I will not destroy it for the ten's
sake.'' \bibleverse{33} The \textsc{Lord} went his way as soon as he had
finished communing with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place.

\hypertarget{the-fall-of-sodom-and-gomorrha}{%
\subsection{The fall of Sodom and
Gomorrha}\label{the-fall-of-sodom-and-gomorrha}}

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} The two angels came to Sodom at evening. Lot sat in the
gate of Sodom. Lot saw them, and rose up to meet them. He bowed himself
with his face to the earth, \bibleverse{2} and he said, ``See now, my
lords, please come into your servant's house, stay all night, wash your
feet, and you can rise up early, and go on your way.'' They said, ``No,
but we will stay in the street all night.'' \bibleverse{3} He urged them
greatly, and they came in with him, and entered into his house. He made
them a feast, and baked unleavened bread, and they ate. \bibleverse{4}
But before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom,
surrounded the house, both young and old, all the people from every
quarter. \bibleverse{5} They called to Lot, and said to him, ``Where are
the men who came in to you this night? Bring them out to us, that we may
have sex with them.'' \bibleverse{6} Lot went out to them through the
door, and shut the door after himself. \bibleverse{7} He said, ``Please,
my brothers, don't act so wickedly. \bibleverse{8} See now, I have two
virgin daughters. Please let me bring them out to you, and you may do to
them what seems good to you. Only don't do anything to these men,
because they have come under the shadow of my roof.'' \bibleverse{9}
They said, ``Stand back!'' Then they said, ``This one fellow came in to
live as a foreigner, and he appoints himself a judge. Now we will deal
worse with you than with them!'' They pressed hard on the man Lot, and
came near to break the door. \bibleverse{10} But the men reached out
their hand, and brought Lot into the house to them, and shut the door.
\bibleverse{11} They struck the men who were at the door of the house
with blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied themselves to
find the door.

\hypertarget{lots-salvation}{%
\subsection{Lot's Salvation}\label{lots-salvation}}

\bibleverse{12} The men said to Lot, ``Do you have anybody else here?
Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and whomever you have in the
city, bring them out of the place: \bibleverse{13} for we will destroy
this place, because the outcry against them has grown so great before
the \textsc{Lord} that the \textsc{Lord} has sent us to destroy it.''
\bibleverse{14} Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law, who were
pledged to marry his daughters, and said, ``Get up! Get out of this
place, for the \textsc{Lord} will destroy the city!'' But he seemed to
his sons-in-law to be joking. \bibleverse{15} When the morning came,
then the angels hurried Lot, saying, ``Get up! Take your wife and your
two daughters who are here, lest you be consumed in the iniquity of the
city.'' \bibleverse{16} But he lingered; and the men grabbed his hand,
his wife's hand, and his two daughters' hands, the \textsc{Lord} being
merciful to him; and they took him out, and set him outside of the city.
\bibleverse{17} It came to pass, when they had taken them out, that he
said, ``Escape for your life! Don't look behind you, and don't stay
anywhere in the plain. Escape to the mountains, lest you be consumed!''
\bibleverse{18} Lot said to them, ``Oh, not so, my lord. \bibleverse{19}
See now, your servant has found favour in your sight, and you have
magnified your loving kindness, which you have shown to me in saving my
life. I can't escape to the mountain, lest evil overtake me, and I die.
\bibleverse{20} See now, this city is near to flee to, and it is a
little one. Oh let me escape there (isn't it a little one?), and my soul
will live.'' \bibleverse{21} He said to him, ``Behold, I have granted
your request concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow the
city of which you have spoken. \bibleverse{22} Hurry, escape there, for
I can't do anything until you get there.'' Therefore the name of the
city was called Zoar.\footnote{\textbf{19:22} Zoar means ``little''.}
\bibleverse{23} The sun had risen on the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
\bibleverse{24} Then the \textsc{Lord} rained on Sodom and on Gomorrah
sulphur and fire from the \textsc{Lord} out of the sky. \bibleverse{25}
He overthrew those cities, all the plain, all the inhabitants of the
cities, and that which grew on the ground. \bibleverse{26} But Lot's
wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
\bibleverse{27} Abraham went up early in the morning to the place where
he had stood before the \textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{28} He looked towards
Sodom and Gomorrah, and towards all the land of the plain, and saw that
the smoke of the land went up as the smoke of a furnace. \bibleverse{29}
When God destroyed the cities of the plain, God remembered Abraham, and
sent Lot out of the middle of the overthrow, when he overthrew the
cities in which Lot lived.

\hypertarget{the-sin-of-lots-daughters-the-birth-of-the-parents-of-the-moabites-and-ammonites}{%
\subsection{The sin of Lot's daughters; The birth of the parents of the
Moabites and
Ammonites}\label{the-sin-of-lots-daughters-the-birth-of-the-parents-of-the-moabites-and-ammonites}}

\bibleverse{30} Lot went up out of Zoar, and lived in the mountain, and
his two daughters with him; for he was afraid to live in Zoar. He lived
in a cave with his two daughters. \bibleverse{31} The firstborn said to
the younger, ``Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to
come in to us in the way of all the earth. \bibleverse{32} Come, let's
make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may
preserve our father's family line.'' \bibleverse{33} They made their
father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with
her father. He didn't know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
\bibleverse{34} It came to pass on the next day, that the firstborn said
to the younger, ``Behold, I lay last night with my father. Let's make
him drink wine again tonight. You go in, and lie with him, that we may
preserve our father's family line.'' \bibleverse{35} They made their
father drink wine that night also. The younger went and lay with him. He
didn't know when she lay down, nor when she got up. \bibleverse{36} Thus
both of Lot's daughters were with child by their father. \bibleverse{37}
The firstborn bore a son, and named him Moab. He is the father of the
Moabites to this day. \bibleverse{38} The younger also bore a son, and
called his name Ben Ammi. He is the father of the children of Ammon to
this day.

\hypertarget{abraham-to-abimelech-in-gerar}{%
\subsection{Abraham to Abimelech in
Gerar}\label{abraham-to-abimelech-in-gerar}}

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} Abraham travelled from there towards the land of the
South, and lived between Kadesh and Shur. He lived as a foreigner in
Gerar. \bibleverse{2} Abraham said about Sarah his wife, ``She is my
sister.'' Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah. \bibleverse{3}
But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said to him,
``Behold, you are a dead man, because of the woman whom you have taken;
for she is a man's wife.'' \bibleverse{4} Now Abimelech had not come
near her. He said, ``Lord, will you kill even a righteous nation?
\bibleverse{5} Didn't he tell me, `She is my sister'? She, even she
herself, said, `He is my brother.' I have done this in the integrity of
my heart and the innocence of my hands.'' \bibleverse{6} God said to him
in the dream, ``Yes, I know that in the integrity of your heart you have
done this, and I also withheld you from sinning against me. Therefore I
didn't allow you to touch her. \bibleverse{7} Now therefore, restore the
man's wife. For he is a prophet, and he will pray for you, and you will
live. If you don't restore her, know for sure that you will die, you,
and all who are yours.'' \bibleverse{8} Abimelech rose early in the
morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their
ear. The men were very scared. \bibleverse{9} Then Abimelech called
Abraham, and said to him, ``What have you done to us? How have I sinned
against you, that you have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
You have done deeds to me that ought not to be done!'' \bibleverse{10}
Abimelech said to Abraham, ``What did you see, that you have done this
thing?'' \bibleverse{11} Abraham said, ``Because I thought, `Surely the
fear of God is not in this place. They will kill me for my wife's sake.'
\bibleverse{12} Besides, she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
\bibleverse{13} When God caused me to wander from my father's house, I
said to her, `This is your kindness which you shall show to me.
Everywhere that we go, say of me, ``He is my brother.''\,'\,''
\bibleverse{14} Abimelech took sheep and cattle, male servants and
female servants, and gave them to Abraham, and restored Sarah, his wife,
to him. \bibleverse{15} Abimelech said, ``Behold, my land is before you.
Dwell where it pleases you.'' \bibleverse{16} To Sarah he said,
``Behold, I have given your brother a thousand pieces of silver. Behold,
it is for you a covering of the eyes to all that are with you. In front
of all you are vindicated.'' \bibleverse{17} Abraham prayed to God. So
God healed Abimelech, his wife, and his female servants, and they bore
children. \bibleverse{18} For the \textsc{Lord} had closed up tight all
the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.

\hypertarget{birth-of-isaac}{%
\subsection{Birth of Isaac}\label{birth-of-isaac}}

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} The \textsc{Lord} visited Sarah as he had said, and the
\textsc{Lord} did to Sarah as he had spoken. \bibleverse{2} Sarah
conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of
which God had spoken to him. \bibleverse{3} Abraham called his son who
was born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac.\footnote{\textbf{21:3}
  Isaac means ``He laughs''.} \bibleverse{4} Abraham circumcised his
son, Isaac, when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him.
\bibleverse{5} Abraham was one hundred years old when his son, Isaac,
was born to him. \bibleverse{6} Sarah said, ``God has made me laugh.
Everyone who hears will laugh with me.'' \bibleverse{7} She said, ``Who
would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? For I have
borne him a son in his old age.'' \bibleverse{8} The child grew and was
weaned. Abraham made a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.

\hypertarget{the-repudiation-and-salvation-of-ishmael}{%
\subsection{The repudiation and salvation of
Ishmael}\label{the-repudiation-and-salvation-of-ishmael}}

\bibleverse{9} Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had
borne to Abraham, mocking. \bibleverse{10} Therefore she said to
Abraham, ``Cast out this servant and her son! For the son of this
servant will not be heir with my son, Isaac.'' \bibleverse{11} The thing
was very grievous in Abraham's sight on account of his son.
\bibleverse{12} God said to Abraham, ``Don't let it be grievous in your
sight because of the boy, and because of your servant. In all that Sarah
says to you, listen to her voice. For your offspring will be named
through Isaac. \bibleverse{13} I will also make a nation of the son of
the servant, because he is your child.'' \bibleverse{14} Abraham rose up
early in the morning, and took bread and a container of water, and gave
it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder; and gave her the child, and
sent her away. She departed, and wandered in the wilderness of
Beersheba. \bibleverse{15} The water in the container was spent, and she
put the child under one of the shrubs. \bibleverse{16} She went and sat
down opposite him, a good way off, about a bow shot away. For she said,
``Don't let me see the death of the child.'' She sat opposite him, and
lifted up her voice, and wept. \bibleverse{17} God heard the voice of
the boy. The angel of God called to Hagar out of the sky, and said to
her, ``What troubles you, Hagar? Don't be afraid. For God has heard the
voice of the boy where he is. \bibleverse{18} Get up, lift up the boy,
and hold him with your hand. For I will make him a great nation.''
\bibleverse{19} God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water. She
went, filled the container with water, and gave the boy a drink.
\bibleverse{20} God was with the boy, and he grew. He lived in the
wilderness, and as he grew up, he became an archer. \bibleverse{21} He
lived in the wilderness of Paran. His mother got a wife for him out of
the land of Egypt.

\hypertarget{the-covenant-between-abraham-and-abimelech}{%
\subsection{The covenant between Abraham and
Abimelech}\label{the-covenant-between-abraham-and-abimelech}}

\bibleverse{22} At that time, Abimelech and Phicol the captain of his
army spoke to Abraham, saying, ``God is with you in all that you do.
\bibleverse{23} Now, therefore, swear to me here by God that you will
not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son. But
according to the kindness that I have done to you, you shall do to me,
and to the land in which you have lived as a foreigner.''
\bibleverse{24} Abraham said, ``I will swear.'' \bibleverse{25} Abraham
complained to Abimelech because of a water well, which Abimelech's
servants had violently taken away. \bibleverse{26} Abimelech said, ``I
don't know who has done this thing. You didn't tell me, and I didn't
hear of it until today.'' \bibleverse{27} Abraham took sheep and cattle,
and gave them to Abimelech. Those two made a covenant. \bibleverse{28}
Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves. \bibleverse{29}
Abimelech said to Abraham, ``What do these seven ewe lambs, which you
have set by themselves, mean?'' \bibleverse{30} He said, ``You shall
take these seven ewe lambs from my hand, that it may be a witness to me,
that I have dug this well.'' \bibleverse{31} Therefore he called that
place Beersheba,\footnote{\textbf{21:31} Beersheba can mean ``well of
  the oath'' or ``well of seven''.} because they both swore an oath
there. \bibleverse{32} So they made a covenant at Beersheba. Abimelech
rose up with Phicol, the captain of his army, and they returned into the
land of the Philistines. \bibleverse{33} Abraham planted a tamarisk tree
in Beersheba, and there he called on the name of the \textsc{Lord}, the
Everlasting God. \bibleverse{34} Abraham lived as a foreigner in the
land of the Philistines many days.

\hypertarget{gods-command-to-sacrifice-isaac}{%
\subsection{God's command to sacrifice
Isaac}\label{gods-command-to-sacrifice-isaac}}

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, God tested Abraham, and said to him,
``Abraham!'' He said, ``Here I am.'' \bibleverse{2} He said, ``Now take
your son, your only son, Isaac, whom you love, and go into the land of
Moriah. Offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains
which I will tell you of.''

\hypertarget{abrahams-obedience}{%
\subsection{Abraham's Obedience}\label{abrahams-obedience}}

\bibleverse{3} Abraham rose early in the morning, and saddled his
donkey; and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son. He
split the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went to the
place of which God had told him. \bibleverse{4} On the third day Abraham
lifted up his eyes, and saw the place far off. \bibleverse{5} Abraham
said to his young men, ``Stay here with the donkey. The boy and I will
go over there. We will worship, and come back to you.'' \bibleverse{6}
Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it on Isaac his
son. He took in his hand the fire and the knife. They both went
together. \bibleverse{7} Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said,
``My father?'' He said, ``Here I am, my son.'' He said, ``Here is the
fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?''
\bibleverse{8} Abraham said, ``God will provide himself the lamb for a
burnt offering, my son.'' So they both went together.

\hypertarget{the-preparation-of-the-holocaust-and-the-intervention-of-god}{%
\subsection{The preparation of the holocaust and the intervention of
God}\label{the-preparation-of-the-holocaust-and-the-intervention-of-god}}

\bibleverse{9} They came to the place which God had told him of. Abraham
built the altar there, and laid the wood in order, bound Isaac his son,
and laid him on the altar, on the wood. \bibleverse{10} Abraham
stretched out his hand, and took the knife to kill his son.
\bibleverse{11} The \textsc{Lord}'s angel called to him out of the sky,
and said, ``Abraham, Abraham!'' He said, ``Here I am.'' \bibleverse{12}
He said, ``Don't lay your hand on the boy or do anything to him. For now
I know that you fear God, since you have not withheld your son, your
only son, from me.'' \bibleverse{13} Abraham lifted up his eyes, and
looked, and saw that behind him was a ram caught in the thicket by his
horns. Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt
offering instead of his son. \bibleverse{14} Abraham called the name of
that place ``The \textsc{Lord} Will Provide''.\footnote{\textbf{22:14}
  or, the \textsc{Lord} Jireh, or, the \textsc{Lord} Seeing} As it is
said to this day, ``On the \textsc{Lord}'s mountain, it will be
provided.''

\hypertarget{gods-approval-and-promises-by-abraham}{%
\subsection{God's approval and promises by
Abraham}\label{gods-approval-and-promises-by-abraham}}

\bibleverse{15} The \textsc{Lord}'s angel called to Abraham a second
time out of the sky, \bibleverse{16} and said, ``\,`I have sworn by
myself,' says the \textsc{Lord}, `because you have done this thing, and
have not withheld your son, your only son, \bibleverse{17} that I will
bless you greatly, and I will multiply your offspring greatly like the
stars of the heavens, and like the sand which is on the seashore. Your
offspring will possess the gate of his enemies. \bibleverse{18} All the
nations of the earth will be blessed by your offspring, because you have
obeyed my voice.'\,'' \bibleverse{19} So Abraham returned to his young
men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba. Abraham lived at
Beersheba.

\hypertarget{the-descendants-of-nahor-the-brother-of-abraham}{%
\subsection{The descendants of Nahor, the brother of
Abraham}\label{the-descendants-of-nahor-the-brother-of-abraham}}

\bibleverse{20} After these things, Abraham was told, ``Behold, Milcah,
she also has borne children to your brother Nahor: \bibleverse{21} Uz
his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kemuel the father of Aram,
\bibleverse{22} Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel.''
\bibleverse{23} Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. These eight Milcah
bore to Nahor, Abraham's brother. \bibleverse{24} His concubine, whose
name was Reumah, also bore Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.

\hypertarget{saras-death-and-burial}{%
\subsection{Sara's death and burial}\label{saras-death-and-burial}}

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Sarah lived one hundred and twenty-seven years. This was
the length of Sarah's life. \bibleverse{2} Sarah died in Kiriath Arba
(also called Hebron), in the land of Canaan. Abraham came to mourn for
Sarah, and to weep for her. \bibleverse{3} Abraham rose up from before
his dead and spoke to the children of Heth, saying, \bibleverse{4} ``I
am a stranger and a foreigner living with you. Give me a possession of a
burying-place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.''
\bibleverse{5} The children of Heth answered Abraham, saying to him,
\bibleverse{6} ``Hear us, my lord. You are a prince of God amongst us.
Bury your dead in the best of our tombs. None of us will withhold from
you his tomb. Bury your dead.'' \bibleverse{7} Abraham rose up, and
bowed himself to the people of the land, to the children of Heth.
\bibleverse{8} He talked with them, saying, ``If you agree that I should
bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me to Ephron the
son of Zohar, \bibleverse{9} that he may sell me the cave of Machpelah,
which he has, which is in the end of his field. For the full price let
him sell it to me amongst you as a possession for a burial place.''
\bibleverse{10} Now Ephron was sitting in the middle of the children of
Heth. Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of the children
of Heth, even of all who went in at the gate of his city, saying,
\bibleverse{11} ``No, my lord, hear me. I give you the field, and I give
you the cave that is in it. In the presence of the children of my people
I give it to you. Bury your dead.'' \bibleverse{12} Abraham bowed
himself down before the people of the land. \bibleverse{13} He spoke to
Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, ``But if you
will, please hear me. I will give the price of the field. Take it from
me, and I will bury my dead there.'' \bibleverse{14} Ephron answered
Abraham, saying to him, \bibleverse{15} ``My lord, listen to me. What is
a piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver\footnote{\textbf{23:15}
  A shekel is about 10 grams, so 400 shekels would be about 4 kg. or 8.8
  pounds.} between me and you? Therefore bury your dead.''
\bibleverse{16} Abraham listened to Ephron. Abraham weighed to Ephron
the silver which he had named in the hearing of the children of Heth,
four hundred shekels of silver, according to the current merchants'
standard. \bibleverse{17} So the field of Ephron, which was in
Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, the cave which was in it,
and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all of its
borders, were deeded \bibleverse{18} to Abraham for a possession in the
presence of the children of Heth, before all who went in at the gate of
his city. \bibleverse{19} After this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in
the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (that is, Hebron), in
the land of Canaan. \bibleverse{20} The field, and the cave that is in
it, were deeded to Abraham by the children of Heth as a possession for a
burial place.

\hypertarget{abraham-sends-his-servant-to-find-a-wife-for-isaac}{%
\subsection{Abraham sends his servant to find a wife for
Isaac}\label{abraham-sends-his-servant-to-find-a-wife-for-isaac}}

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} Abraham was old, and well advanced in age. The
\textsc{Lord} had blessed Abraham in all things. \bibleverse{2} Abraham
said to his servant, the elder of his house, who ruled over all that he
had, ``Please put your hand under my thigh. \bibleverse{3} I will make
you swear by the \textsc{Lord}, the God of heaven and the God of the
earth, that you shall not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, amongst whom I live. \bibleverse{4} But you shall go to my
country, and to my relatives, and take a wife for my son Isaac.''
\bibleverse{5} The servant said to him, ``What if the woman isn't
willing to follow me to this land? Must I bring your son again to the
land you came from?'' \bibleverse{6} Abraham said to him, ``Beware that
you don't bring my son there again. \bibleverse{7} The \textsc{Lord},
the God of heaven---who took me from my father's house, and from the
land of my birth, who spoke to me, and who swore to me, saying, `I will
give this land to your offspring---he will send his angel before you,
and you shall take a wife for my son from there. \bibleverse{8} If the
woman isn't willing to follow you, then you shall be clear from this
oath to me. Only you shall not bring my son there again.''
\bibleverse{9} The servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his
master, and swore to him concerning this matter.

\hypertarget{the-servants-journey-through-haran}{%
\subsection{The Servant's Journey Through
Haran}\label{the-servants-journey-through-haran}}

\bibleverse{10} The servant took ten of his master's camels, and
departed, having a variety of good things of his master's with him. He
arose, and went to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor. \bibleverse{11} He
made the camels kneel down outside the city by the well of water at the
time of evening, the time that women go out to draw water.
\bibleverse{12} He said, ``The \textsc{Lord}, the God of my master
Abraham, please give me success today, and show kindness to my master
Abraham. \bibleverse{13} Behold, I am standing by the spring of water.
The daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
\bibleverse{14} Let it happen, that the young lady to whom I will say,
`Please let down your pitcher, that I may drink,' then she says, `Drink,
and I will also give your camels a drink,'---let her be the one you have
appointed for your servant Isaac. By this I will know that you have
shown kindness to my master.'' \bibleverse{15} Before he had finished
speaking, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of
Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher on her
shoulder. \bibleverse{16} The young lady was very beautiful to look at,
a virgin. No man had known her. She went down to the spring, filled her
pitcher, and came up. \bibleverse{17} The servant ran to meet her, and
said, ``Please give me a drink, a little water from your pitcher.''
\bibleverse{18} She said, ``Drink, my lord.'' She hurried, and let down
her pitcher on her hand, and gave him a drink. \bibleverse{19} When she
had finished giving him a drink, she said, ``I will also draw for your
camels, until they have finished drinking.'' \bibleverse{20} She
hurried, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again to the
well to draw, and drew for all his camels. \bibleverse{21} The man
looked steadfastly at her, remaining silent, to know whether the
\textsc{Lord} had made his journey prosperous or not.

\hypertarget{the-servant-arrives-at-nachuxf4rs-house}{%
\subsection{The servant arrives at Nachôr's
house}\label{the-servant-arrives-at-nachuxf4rs-house}}

\bibleverse{22} As the camels had done drinking, the man took a golden
ring of half a shekel\footnote{\textbf{24:22} A shekel is about 10 grams
  or about 0.35 ounces.} weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten
shekels weight of gold, \bibleverse{23} and said, ``Whose daughter are
you? Please tell me. Is there room in your father's house for us to
stay?'' \bibleverse{24} She said to him, ``I am the daughter of Bethuel
the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor.'' \bibleverse{25} She said
moreover to him, ``We have both straw and feed enough, and room to lodge
in.'' \bibleverse{26} The man bowed his head, and worshipped the
\textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{27} He said, ``Blessed be the \textsc{Lord},
the God of my master Abraham, who has not forsaken his loving kindness
and his truth towards my master. As for me, the \textsc{Lord} has led me
on the way to the house of my master's relatives.'' \bibleverse{28} The
young lady ran, and told her mother's house about these words.
\bibleverse{29} Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban. Laban ran
out to the man, to the spring. \bibleverse{30} When he saw the ring, and
the bracelets on his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of
Rebekah his sister, saying, ``This is what the man said to me,'' he came
to the man. Behold, he was standing by the camels at the spring.
\bibleverse{31} He said, ``Come in, you blessed of the \textsc{Lord}.
Why do you stand outside? For I have prepared the house, and room for
the camels.'' \bibleverse{32} The man came into the house, and he
unloaded the camels. He gave straw and feed for the camels, and water to
wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him. \bibleverse{33}
Food was set before him to eat, but he said, ``I will not eat until I
have told my message.'' Laban said, ``Speak on.''

\hypertarget{the-courtship-for-the-bride}{%
\subsection{The courtship for the
bride}\label{the-courtship-for-the-bride}}

\bibleverse{34} He said, ``I am Abraham's servant. \bibleverse{35} The
\textsc{Lord} has blessed my master greatly. He has become great. The
\textsc{Lord} has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold, male
servants and female servants, and camels and donkeys. \bibleverse{36}
Sarah, my master's wife, bore a son to my master when she was old. He
has given all that he has to him. \bibleverse{37} My master made me
swear, saying, `You shall not take a wife for my son from the daughters
of the Canaanites, in whose land I live, \bibleverse{38} but you shall
go to my father's house, and to my relatives, and take a wife for my
son.' \bibleverse{39} I asked my master, `What if the woman will not
follow me?' \bibleverse{40} He said to me, `The \textsc{Lord}, before
whom I walk, will send his angel with you, and prosper your way. You
shall take a wife for my son from my relatives, and of my father's
house. \bibleverse{41} Then you will be clear from my oath, when you
come to my relatives. If they don't give her to you, you shall be clear
from my oath.' \bibleverse{42} I came today to the spring, and said,
`The \textsc{Lord}, the God of my master Abraham, if now you do prosper
my way which I go--- \bibleverse{43} behold, I am standing by this
spring of water. Let it happen, that the maiden who comes out to draw,
to whom I will say, ``Please give me a little water from your pitcher to
drink,'' \bibleverse{44} then she tells me, ``Drink, and I will also
draw for your camels,''---let her be the woman whom the \textsc{Lord}
has appointed for my master's son.' \bibleverse{45} Before I had
finished speaking in my heart, behold, Rebekah came out with her pitcher
on her shoulder. She went down to the spring, and drew. I said to her,
`Please let me drink.' \bibleverse{46} She hurried and let down her
pitcher from her shoulder, and said, `Drink, and I will also give your
camels a drink.' So I drank, and she also gave the camels a drink.
\bibleverse{47} I asked her, and said, `Whose daughter are you?' She
said, `The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bore to him.' I
put the ring on her nose, and the bracelets on her hands.
\bibleverse{48} I bowed my head, and worshipped the \textsc{Lord}, and
blessed the \textsc{Lord}, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me
in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son.
\bibleverse{49} Now if you will deal kindly and truly with my master,
tell me. If not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand, or to the
left.''

\hypertarget{rebekahs-farewell}{%
\subsection{Rebekah's farewell}\label{rebekahs-farewell}}

\bibleverse{50} Then Laban and Bethuel answered, ``The thing proceeds
from the \textsc{Lord}. We can't speak to you bad or good.
\bibleverse{51} Behold, Rebekah is before you. Take her, and go, and let
her be your master's son's wife, as the \textsc{Lord} has spoken.''
\bibleverse{52} When Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed
himself down to the earth to the \textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{53} The
servant brought out jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and clothing,
and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave precious things to her brother
and her mother. \bibleverse{54} They ate and drank, he and the men who
were with him, and stayed all night. They rose up in the morning, and he
said, ``Send me away to my master.'' \bibleverse{55} Her brother and her
mother said, ``Let the young lady stay with us a few days, at least ten.
After that she will go.'' \bibleverse{56} He said to them, ``Don't
hinder me, since the \textsc{Lord} has prospered my way. Send me away
that I may go to my master.'' \bibleverse{57} They said, ``We will call
the young lady, and ask her.'' \bibleverse{58} They called Rebekah, and
said to her, ``Will you go with this man?'' She said, ``I will go.''
\bibleverse{59} They sent away Rebekah, their sister, with her nurse,
Abraham's servant, and his men. \bibleverse{60} They blessed Rebekah,
and said to her, ``Our sister, may you be the mother of thousands of ten
thousands, and let your offspring possess the gate of those who hate
them.'' \bibleverse{61} Rebekah arose with her ladies. They rode on the
camels, and followed the man. The servant took Rebekah, and went his
way.

\hypertarget{the-arrival-of-the-bride-to-the-groom}{%
\subsection{The arrival of the bride to the
groom}\label{the-arrival-of-the-bride-to-the-groom}}

\bibleverse{62} Isaac came from the way of Beer Lahai Roi, for he lived
in the land of the South. \bibleverse{63} Isaac went out to meditate in
the field at the evening. He lifted up his eyes and looked. Behold,
there were camels coming. \bibleverse{64} Rebekah lifted up her eyes,
and when she saw Isaac, she got off the camel. \bibleverse{65} She said
to the servant, ``Who is the man who is walking in the field to meet
us?'' The servant said, ``It is my master.'' She took her veil, and
covered herself. \bibleverse{66} The servant told Isaac all the things
that he had done. \bibleverse{67} Isaac brought her into his mother
Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife. He loved her.
So Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.

\hypertarget{abrahams-second-marriage-his-death-and-burial}{%
\subsection{Abraham's second marriage; his death and
burial}\label{abrahams-second-marriage-his-death-and-burial}}

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Abraham took another wife, and her name was Keturah.
\bibleverse{2} She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and
Shuah. \bibleverse{3} Jokshan became the father of Sheba, and Dedan. The
sons of Dedan were Asshurim, Letushim, and Leummim. \bibleverse{4} The
sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these
were the children of Keturah. \bibleverse{5} Abraham gave all that he
had to Isaac, \bibleverse{6} but Abraham gave gifts to the sons of
Abraham's concubines. While he still lived, he sent them away from Isaac
his son, eastward, to the east country. \bibleverse{7} These are the
days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived: one hundred and
seventy-five years. \bibleverse{8} Abraham gave up his spirit, and died
at a good old age, an old man, and full of years, and was gathered to
his people. \bibleverse{9} Isaac and Ishmael, his sons, buried him in
the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar the
Hittite, which is near Mamre, \bibleverse{10} the field which Abraham
purchased from the children of Heth. Abraham was buried there with
Sarah, his wife. \bibleverse{11} After the death of Abraham, God blessed
Isaac, his son. Isaac lived by Beer Lahai Roi.

\hypertarget{descendants-of-ishmael}{%
\subsection{Descendants of Ishmael}\label{descendants-of-ishmael}}

\bibleverse{12} Now this is the history of the generations of Ishmael,
Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's servant, bore to
Abraham. \bibleverse{13} These are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by
their names, according to the order of their birth: the firstborn of
Ishmael, Nebaioth, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, \bibleverse{14} Mishma,
Dumah, Massa, \bibleverse{15} Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
\bibleverse{16} These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their
names, by their villages, and by their encampments: twelve princes,
according to their nations. \bibleverse{17} These are the years of the
life of Ishmael: one hundred and thirty-seven years. He gave up his
spirit and died, and was gathered to his people. \bibleverse{18} They
lived from Havilah to Shur that is before Egypt, as you go towards
Assyria. He lived opposite all his relatives.

\hypertarget{the-birth-of-esau-and-jacob}{%
\subsection{The birth of Esau and
Jacob}\label{the-birth-of-esau-and-jacob}}

\bibleverse{19} This is the history of the generations of Isaac,
Abraham's son. Abraham became the father of Isaac. \bibleverse{20} Isaac
was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the
Syrian of Paddan Aram, the sister of Laban the Syrian, to be his wife.
\bibleverse{21} Isaac entreated the \textsc{Lord} for his wife, because
she was barren. The \textsc{Lord} was entreated by him, and Rebekah his
wife conceived. \bibleverse{22} The children struggled together within
her. She said, ``If it is like this, why do I live?'' She went to
enquire of the \textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{23} The \textsc{Lord} said to
her, ``Two nations are in your womb. Two peoples will be separated from
your body. The one people will be stronger than the other people. The
elder will serve the younger.'' \bibleverse{24} When her days to be
delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
\bibleverse{25} The first came out red all over, like a hairy garment.
They named him Esau. \bibleverse{26} After that, his brother came out,
and his hand had hold on Esau's heel. He was named Jacob. Isaac was
sixty years old when she bore them. \bibleverse{27} The boys grew. Esau
was a skilful hunter, a man of the field. Jacob was a quiet man, living
in tents. \bibleverse{28} Now Isaac loved Esau, because he ate his
venison. Rebekah loved Jacob.

\hypertarget{jacob-buys-esaus-birthright}{%
\subsection{Jacob buys Esau's
birthright}\label{jacob-buys-esaus-birthright}}

\bibleverse{29} Jacob boiled stew. Esau came in from the field, and he
was famished. \bibleverse{30} Esau said to Jacob, ``Please feed me with
some of that red stew, for I am famished.'' Therefore his name was
called Edom.\footnote{\textbf{25:30} ``Edom'' means ``red''.}
\bibleverse{31} Jacob said, ``First, sell me your birthright.''
\bibleverse{32} Esau said, ``Behold, I am about to die. What good is the
birthright to me?'' \bibleverse{33} Jacob said, ``Swear to me first.''
He swore to him. He sold his birthright to Jacob. \bibleverse{34} Jacob
gave Esau bread and lentil stew. He ate and drank, rose up, and went his
way. So Esau despised his birthright.

\hypertarget{isaac-moves-to-gerar-when-there-is-hunger}{%
\subsection{Isaac moves to Gerar when there is
hunger}\label{isaac-moves-to-gerar-when-there-is-hunger}}

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} There was a famine in the land, in addition to the first
famine that was in the days of Abraham. Isaac went to Abimelech king of
the Philistines, to Gerar. \bibleverse{2} The \textsc{Lord} appeared to
him, and said, ``Don't go down into Egypt. Live in the land I will tell
you about. \bibleverse{3} Live in this land, and I will be with you, and
will bless you. For I will give to you, and to your offspring, all these
lands, and I will establish the oath which I swore to Abraham your
father. \bibleverse{4} I will multiply your offspring as the stars of
the sky, and will give all these lands to your offspring. In your
offspring all the nations of the earth will be blessed, \bibleverse{5}
because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my requirements, my
commandments, my statutes, and my laws.'' \bibleverse{6} Isaac lived in
Gerar. \bibleverse{7} The men of the place asked him about his wife. He
said, ``She is my sister,'' for he was afraid to say, ``My wife'', lest,
he thought, ``the men of the place might kill me for Rebekah, because
she is beautiful to look at.'' \bibleverse{8} When he had been there a
long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and
saw, and, behold, Isaac was caressing Rebekah, his wife. \bibleverse{9}
Abimelech called Isaac, and said, ``Behold, surely she is your wife. Why
did you say, `She is my sister?'\,'' Isaac said to him, ``Because I
said, `Lest I die because of her.'\,'' \bibleverse{10} Abimelech said,
``What is this you have done to us? One of the people might easily have
lain with your wife, and you would have brought guilt on us!''
\bibleverse{11} Abimelech commanded all the people, saying, ``He who
touches this man or his wife will surely be put to death.''

\hypertarget{isaacs-growing-wealth-font-disputes}{%
\subsection{Isaac's growing wealth; Font
disputes;}\label{isaacs-growing-wealth-font-disputes}}

\bibleverse{12} Isaac sowed in that land, and reaped in the same year
one hundred times what he planted. The \textsc{Lord} blessed him.
\bibleverse{13} The man grew great, and grew more and more until he
became very great. \bibleverse{14} He had possessions of flocks,
possessions of herds, and a great household. The Philistines envied him.
\bibleverse{15} Now all the wells which his father's servants had dug in
the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped, and filled
with earth. \bibleverse{16} Abimelech said to Isaac, ``Go away from us,
for you are much mightier than we.'' \bibleverse{17} Isaac departed from
there, encamped in the valley of Gerar, and lived there. \bibleverse{18}
Isaac dug again the wells of water, which they had dug in the days of
Abraham his father, for the Philistines had stopped them after the death
of Abraham. He called their names after the names by which his father
had called them. \bibleverse{19} Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and
found there a well of flowing\footnote{\textbf{26:19} Or, living. Or,
  fresh.} water. \bibleverse{20} The herdsmen of Gerar argued with
Isaac's herdsmen, saying, ``The water is ours.'' So he called the name
of the well Esek,\footnote{\textbf{26:20} ``Esek'' means ``contention''.}
because they contended with him. \bibleverse{21} They dug another well,
and they argued over that, also. So he called its name
Sitnah.\footnote{\textbf{26:21} ``Sitnah'' means ``hostility''.}
\bibleverse{22} He left that place, and dug another well. They didn't
argue over that one. So he called it Rehoboth.\footnote{\textbf{26:22}
  ``Rehoboth'' means ``broad places''.} He said, ``For now the
\textsc{Lord} has made room for us, and we will be fruitful in the
land.'' \bibleverse{23} He went up from there to Beersheba.
\bibleverse{24} The \textsc{Lord} appeared to him the same night, and
said, ``I am the God of Abraham your father. Don't be afraid, for I am
with you, and will bless you, and multiply your offspring for my servant
Abraham's sake.'' \bibleverse{25} He built an altar there, and called on
the \textsc{Lord}'s name, and pitched his tent there. There Isaac's
servants dug a well.

\hypertarget{the-covenant-between-isaac-and-abimelech-at-beersheba}{%
\subsection{The covenant between Isaac and Abimelech at
Beersheba}\label{the-covenant-between-isaac-and-abimelech-at-beersheba}}

\bibleverse{26} Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath his
friend, and Phicol the captain of his army. \bibleverse{27} Isaac said
to them, ``Why have you come to me, since you hate me, and have sent me
away from you?'' \bibleverse{28} They said, ``We saw plainly that the
\textsc{Lord} was with you. We said, `Let there now be an oath between
us, even between us and you, and let's make a covenant with you,
\bibleverse{29} that you will do us no harm, as we have not touched you,
and as we have done to you nothing but good, and have sent you away in
peace.' You are now the blessed of the \textsc{Lord}.'' \bibleverse{30}
He made them a feast, and they ate and drank. \bibleverse{31} They rose
up some time in the morning, and swore an oath to one another. Isaac
sent them away, and they departed from him in peace. \bibleverse{32} The
same day, Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which
they had dug, and said to him, ``We have found water.'' \bibleverse{33}
He called it ``Shibah''.\footnote{\textbf{26:33} Shibah means ``oath''
  or ``seven''.} Therefore the name of the city is
``Beersheba''\footnote{\textbf{26:33} Beersheba means ``well of the
  oath'' or ``well of the seven''} to this day.

\hypertarget{esau-marries-two-hittite-women-against-the-will-of-his-parents}{%
\subsection{Esau marries two Hittite women against the will of his
parents}\label{esau-marries-two-hittite-women-against-the-will-of-his-parents}}

\bibleverse{34} When Esau was forty years old, he took as wife Judith,
the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath, the daughter of Elon
the Hittite. \bibleverse{35} They grieved Isaac's and Rebekah's spirits.

\hypertarget{isaac-prepares-to-bless-esau}{%
\subsection{Isaac prepares to bless
Esau}\label{isaac-prepares-to-bless-esau}}

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} When Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he
could not see, he called Esau his elder son, and said to him, ``My
son?'' He said to him, ``Here I am.'' \bibleverse{2} He said, ``See now,
I am old. I don't know the day of my death. \bibleverse{3} Now
therefore, please take your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go
out to the field, and get me venison. \bibleverse{4} Make me savoury
food, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat, and that my
soul may bless you before I die.''

\hypertarget{rebecas-deceitful-intervention}{%
\subsection{Rebeca's deceitful
intervention}\label{rebecas-deceitful-intervention}}

\bibleverse{5} Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. Esau went
to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it. \bibleverse{6}
Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son, saying, ``Behold, I heard your father
speak to Esau your brother, saying, \bibleverse{7} `Bring me venison,
and make me savoury food, that I may eat, and bless you before the
\textsc{Lord} before my death.' \bibleverse{8} Now therefore, my son,
obey my voice according to that which I command you. \bibleverse{9} Go
now to the flock and get me two good young goats from there. I will make
them savoury food for your father, such as he loves. \bibleverse{10} You
shall bring it to your father, that he may eat, so that he may bless you
before his death.'' \bibleverse{11} Jacob said to Rebekah his mother,
``Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man.
\bibleverse{12} What if my father touches me? I will seem to him as a
deceiver, and I would bring a curse on myself, and not a blessing.''
\bibleverse{13} His mother said to him, ``Let your curse be on me, my
son. Only obey my voice, and go get them for me.'' \bibleverse{14} He
went, and got them, and brought them to his mother. His mother made
savoury food, such as his father loved. \bibleverse{15} Rebekah took the
good clothes of Esau, her elder son, which were with her in the house,
and put them on Jacob, her younger son. \bibleverse{16} She put the
skins of the young goats on his hands, and on the smooth of his neck.
\bibleverse{17} She gave the savoury food and the bread, which she had
prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.

\hypertarget{jacob-receives-the-blessing-of-the-firstborn}{%
\subsection{Jacob receives the blessing of the
firstborn}\label{jacob-receives-the-blessing-of-the-firstborn}}

\bibleverse{18} He came to his father, and said, ``My father?'' He said,
``Here I am. Who are you, my son?'' \bibleverse{19} Jacob said to his
father, ``I am Esau your firstborn. I have done what you asked me to do.
Please arise, sit and eat of my venison, that your soul may bless me.''
\bibleverse{20} Isaac said to his son, ``How is it that you have found
it so quickly, my son?'' He said, ``Because the \textsc{Lord} your God
gave me success.'' \bibleverse{21} Isaac said to Jacob, ``Please come
near, that I may feel you, my son, whether you are really my son Esau or
not.'' \bibleverse{22} Jacob went near to Isaac his father. He felt him,
and said, ``The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of
Esau.'' \bibleverse{23} He didn't recognise him, because his hands were
hairy, like his brother Esau's hands. So he blessed him. \bibleverse{24}
He said, ``Are you really my son Esau?'' He said, ``I am.''
\bibleverse{25} He said, ``Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my
son's venison, that my soul may bless you.'' He brought it near to him,
and he ate. He brought him wine, and he drank. \bibleverse{26} His
father Isaac said to him, ``Come near now, and kiss me, my son.''
\bibleverse{27} He came near, and kissed him. He smelled the smell of
his clothing, and blessed him, and said, ``Behold, the smell of my son
is as the smell of a field which the \textsc{Lord} has blessed.
\bibleverse{28} God give you of the dew of the sky, of the fatness of
the earth, and plenty of grain and new wine. \bibleverse{29} Let peoples
serve you, and nations bow down to you. Be lord over your brothers. Let
your mother's sons bow down to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you.
Blessed be everyone who blesses you.''

\hypertarget{the-return-of-esau-his-lament-and-the-blessing-his-father-gave-him}{%
\subsection{The return of Esau, his lament and the blessing his father
gave
him}\label{the-return-of-esau-his-lament-and-the-blessing-his-father-gave-him}}

\bibleverse{30} As soon as Isaac had finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob
had just gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, Esau his
brother came in from his hunting. \bibleverse{31} He also made savoury
food, and brought it to his father. He said to his father, ``Let my
father arise, and eat of his son's venison, that your soul may bless
me.'' \bibleverse{32} Isaac his father said to him, ``Who are you?'' He
said, ``I am your son, your firstborn, Esau.'' \bibleverse{33} Isaac
trembled violently, and said, ``Who, then, is he who has taken venison,
and brought it to me, and I have eaten of all before you came, and have
blessed him? Yes, he will be blessed.'' \bibleverse{34} When Esau heard
the words of his father, he cried with an exceedingly great and bitter
cry, and said to his father, ``Bless me, even me also, my father.''
\bibleverse{35} He said, ``Your brother came with deceit, and has taken
away your blessing.'' \bibleverse{36} He said, ``Isn't he rightly named
Jacob? For he has supplanted me these two times. He took away my
birthright. See, now he has taken away my blessing.'' He said, ``Haven't
you reserved a blessing for me?'' \bibleverse{37} Isaac answered Esau,
``Behold, I have made him your lord, and all his brothers I have given
to him for servants. I have sustained him with grain and new wine. What
then will I do for you, my son?'' \bibleverse{38} Esau said to his
father, ``Do you have just one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me
also, my father.'' Esau lifted up his voice, and wept. \bibleverse{39}
Isaac his father answered him, ``Behold, your dwelling will be of the
fatness of the earth, and of the dew of the sky from above.
\bibleverse{40} You will live by your sword, and you will serve your
brother. It will happen, when you will break loose, that you will shake
his yoke from off your neck.''

\hypertarget{esau-seeks-to-kill-his-brother}{%
\subsection{Esau seeks to kill his
brother}\label{esau-seeks-to-kill-his-brother}}

\bibleverse{41} Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his
father blessed him. Esau said in his heart, ``The days of mourning for
my father are at hand. Then I will kill my brother Jacob.''
\bibleverse{42} The words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebekah.
She sent and called Jacob, her younger son, and said to him, ``Behold,
your brother Esau comforts himself about you by planning to kill you.
\bibleverse{43} Now therefore, my son, obey my voice. Arise, flee to
Laban, my brother, in Haran. \bibleverse{44} Stay with him a few days,
until your brother's fury turns away--- \bibleverse{45} until your
brother's anger turns away from you, and he forgets what you have done
to him. Then I will send, and get you from there. Why should I be
bereaved of you both in one day?'' \bibleverse{46} Rebekah said to
Isaac, ``I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If
Jacob takes a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these, of the
daughters of the land, what good will my life do me?''

\hypertarget{jacob-flees-to-padan-aram}{%
\subsection{Jacob flees to Padan-aram}\label{jacob-flees-to-padan-aram}}

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} Isaac called Jacob, blessed him, and commanded him, ``You
shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. \bibleverse{2} Arise,
go to Paddan Aram, to the house of Bethuel your mother's father. Take a
wife from there from the daughters of Laban, your mother's brother.
\bibleverse{3} May God Almighty bless you, and make you fruitful, and
multiply you, that you may be a company of peoples, \bibleverse{4} and
give you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you,
that you may inherit the land where you travel, which God gave to
Abraham.'' \bibleverse{5} Isaac sent Jacob away. He went to Paddan Aram
to Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and
Esau's mother.

\hypertarget{the-new-marriage-of-esau-with-a-daughter-of-ishmael}{%
\subsection{The new marriage of Esau with a daughter of
Ishmael}\label{the-new-marriage-of-esau-with-a-daughter-of-ishmael}}

\bibleverse{6} Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him
away to Paddan Aram, to take him a wife from there, and that as he
blessed him he gave him a command, saying, ``You shall not take a wife
of the daughters of Canaan;'' \bibleverse{7} and that Jacob obeyed his
father and his mother, and was gone to Paddan Aram. \bibleverse{8} Esau
saw that the daughters of Canaan didn't please Isaac, his father.
\bibleverse{9} So Esau went to Ishmael, and took, in addition to the
wives that he had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the
sister of Nebaioth, to be his wife.

\hypertarget{jacobs-dream-at-bethel-of-the-stairway-to-heaven}{%
\subsection{Jacob's Dream at Bethel of the Stairway to
Heaven}\label{jacobs-dream-at-bethel-of-the-stairway-to-heaven}}

\bibleverse{10} Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went towards Haran.
\bibleverse{11} He came to a certain place, and stayed there all night,
because the sun had set. He took one of the stones of the place, and put
it under his head, and lay down in that place to sleep. \bibleverse{12}
He dreamt and saw a stairway set upon the earth, and its top reached to
heaven. Behold, the angels of God were ascending and descending on it.
\bibleverse{13} Behold, the \textsc{Lord} stood above it, and said, ``I
am the \textsc{Lord}, the God of Abraham your father, and the God of
Isaac. I will give the land you lie on to you and to your offspring.
\bibleverse{14} Your offspring will be as the dust of the earth, and you
will spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and
to the south. In you and in your offspring, all the families of the
earth will be blessed. \bibleverse{15} Behold, I am with you, and will
keep you, wherever you go, and will bring you again into this land. For
I will not leave you until I have done that which I have spoken of to
you.''

\hypertarget{jacob-consecrates-a-memorial-stone-as-the-beginning-of-a-house-of-god-at-bethel}{%
\subsection{Jacob consecrates a memorial stone as the beginning of a
house of God at
Bethel}\label{jacob-consecrates-a-memorial-stone-as-the-beginning-of-a-house-of-god-at-bethel}}

\bibleverse{16} Jacob awakened out of his sleep, and he said, ``Surely
the \textsc{Lord} is in this place, and I didn't know it.''
\bibleverse{17} He was afraid, and said, ``How awesome this place is!
This is none other than God's house, and this is the gate of heaven.''
\bibleverse{18} Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone
that he had put under his head, and set it up for a pillar, and poured
oil on its top. \bibleverse{19} He called the name of that place Bethel,
but the name of the city was Luz at the first. \bibleverse{20} Jacob
vowed a vow, saying, ``If God will be with me, and will keep me in this
way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothing to put on,
\bibleverse{21} so that I come again to my father's house in peace, and
the \textsc{Lord} will be my God, \bibleverse{22} then this stone, which
I have set up for a pillar, will be God's house. Of all that you will
give me I will surely give a tenth to you.''

\hypertarget{jacob-to-the-well-of-haran}{%
\subsection{Jacob to the well of
Haran}\label{jacob-to-the-well-of-haran}}

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{29}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Jacob went on his journey, and came to the land of
the children of the east. \bibleverse{2} He looked, and saw a well in
the field, and saw three flocks of sheep lying there by it. For out of
that well they watered the flocks. The stone on the well's mouth was
large. \bibleverse{3} There all the flocks were gathered. They rolled
the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the
stone back on the well's mouth in its place. \bibleverse{4} Jacob said
to them, ``My relatives, where are you from?'' They said, ``We are from
Haran.'' \bibleverse{5} He said to them, ``Do you know Laban, the son of
Nahor?'' They said, ``We know him.'' \bibleverse{6} He said to them,
``Is it well with him?'' They said, ``It is well. See, Rachel, his
daughter, is coming with the sheep.'' \bibleverse{7} He said, ``Behold,
it is still the middle of the day, not time to gather the livestock
together. Water the sheep, and go and feed them.'' \bibleverse{8} They
said, ``We can't, until all the flocks are gathered together, and they
roll the stone from the well's mouth. Then we will water the sheep.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-greeting-with-rachuxeal-and-his-admission-to-laban}{%
\subsection{Jacob's greeting with Rachêl and his admission to
Laban}\label{jacobs-greeting-with-rachuxeal-and-his-admission-to-laban}}

\bibleverse{9} While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her
father's sheep, for she kept them. \bibleverse{10} When Jacob saw Rachel
the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban, his
mother's brother, Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's
mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
\bibleverse{11} Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
\bibleverse{12} Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's relative, and
that he was Rebekah's son. She ran and told her father. \bibleverse{13}
When Laban heard the news of Jacob, his sister's son, he ran to meet
Jacob, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house.
Jacob told Laban all these things. \bibleverse{14} Laban said to him,
``Surely you are my bone and my flesh.'' Jacob stayed with him for a
month.

\hypertarget{jacob-goes-into-service-with-laban}{%
\subsection{Jacob goes into service with
Laban}\label{jacob-goes-into-service-with-laban}}

\bibleverse{15} Laban said to Jacob, ``Because you are my relative,
should you therefore serve me for nothing? Tell me, what will your wages
be?'' \bibleverse{16} Laban had two daughters. The name of the elder was
Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel. \bibleverse{17} Leah's
eyes were weak, but Rachel was beautiful in form and attractive.
\bibleverse{18} Jacob loved Rachel. He said, ``I will serve you seven
years for Rachel, your younger daughter.'' \bibleverse{19} Laban said,
``It is better that I give her to you, than that I should give her to
another man. Stay with me.'' \bibleverse{20} Jacob served seven years
for Rachel. They seemed to him but a few days, for the love he had for
her. \bibleverse{21} Jacob said to Laban, ``Give me my wife, for my days
are fulfilled, that I may go in to her.'' \bibleverse{22} Laban gathered
together all the men of the place, and made a feast. \bibleverse{23} In
the evening, he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to Jacob. He
went in to her. \bibleverse{24} Laban gave Zilpah his servant to his
daughter Leah for a servant. \bibleverse{25} In the morning, behold, it
was Leah! He said to Laban, ``What is this you have done to me? Didn't I
serve with you for Rachel? Why then have you deceived me?''
\bibleverse{26} Laban said, ``It is not done so in our place, to give
the younger before the firstborn. \bibleverse{27} Fulfil the week of
this one, and we will give you the other also for the service which you
will serve with me for seven more years.'' \bibleverse{28} Jacob did so,
and fulfilled her week. He gave him Rachel his daughter as wife.
\bibleverse{29} Laban gave Bilhah, his servant, to his daughter Rachel
to be her servant. \bibleverse{30} He went in also to Rachel, and he
loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him seven more years.

\hypertarget{leahs-first-four-sons}{%
\subsection{Leah's first four sons}\label{leahs-first-four-sons}}

\bibleverse{31} The \textsc{Lord} saw that Leah was hated, and he opened
her womb, but Rachel was barren. \bibleverse{32} Leah conceived, and
bore a son, and she named him Reuben. For she said, ``Because the
\textsc{Lord} has looked at my affliction; for now my husband will love
me.'' \bibleverse{33} She conceived again, and bore a son, and said,
``Because the \textsc{Lord} has heard that I am hated, he has therefore
given me this son also.'' She named him Simeon. \bibleverse{34} She
conceived again, and bore a son. She said, ``Now this time my husband
will be joined to me, because I have borne him three sons.'' Therefore
his name was called Levi. \bibleverse{35} She conceived again, and bore
a son. She said, ``This time I will praise the \textsc{Lord}.''
Therefore she named him Judah. Then she stopped bearing.

\hypertarget{the-two-sons-of-bilhah-rachuxeals-servant}{%
\subsection{The two sons of Bilhah, Rachêl's
servant}\label{the-two-sons-of-bilhah-rachuxeals-servant}}

\hypertarget{section-29}{%
\section{30}\label{section-29}}

\bibleverse{1} When Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children, Rachel
envied her sister. She said to Jacob, ``Give me children, or else I will
die.'' \bibleverse{2} Jacob's anger burnt against Rachel, and he said,
``Am I in God's place, who has withheld from you the fruit of the
womb?'' \bibleverse{3} She said, ``Behold, my maid Bilhah. Go in to her,
that she may bear on my knees, and I also may obtain children by her.''
\bibleverse{4} She gave him Bilhah her servant as wife, and Jacob went
in to her. \bibleverse{5} Bilhah conceived, and bore Jacob a son.
\bibleverse{6} Rachel said, ``God has judged me, and has also heard my
voice, and has given me a son.'' Therefore she called his name Dan.
\bibleverse{7} Bilhah, Rachel's servant, conceived again, and bore Jacob
a second son. \bibleverse{8} Rachel said, ``I have wrestled with my
sister with mighty wrestlings, and have prevailed.'' She named him
Naphtali.

\hypertarget{the-two-sons-of-silpa-leahs-servant}{%
\subsection{The two sons of Silpa, Leah's
servant}\label{the-two-sons-of-silpa-leahs-servant}}

\bibleverse{9} When Leah saw that she had finished bearing, she took
Zilpah, her servant, and gave her to Jacob as a wife. \bibleverse{10}
Zilpah, Leah's servant, bore Jacob a son. \bibleverse{11} Leah said,
``How fortunate!'' She named him Gad. \bibleverse{12} Zilpah, Leah's
servant, bore Jacob a second son. \bibleverse{13} Leah said, ``Happy am
I, for the daughters will call me happy.'' She named him Asher.

\hypertarget{leas-last-children}{%
\subsection{Lea's last children}\label{leas-last-children}}

\bibleverse{14} Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found
mandrakes in the field, and brought them to his mother, Leah. Then
Rachel said to Leah, ``Please give me some of your son's mandrakes.''
\bibleverse{15} Leah said to her, ``Is it a small matter that you have
taken away my husband? Would you take away my son's mandrakes, also?''
Rachel said, ``Therefore he will lie with you tonight for your son's
mandrakes.'' \bibleverse{16} Jacob came from the field in the evening,
and Leah went out to meet him, and said, ``You must come in to me; for I
have surely hired you with my son's mandrakes.'' He lay with her that
night. \bibleverse{17} God listened to Leah, and she conceived, and bore
Jacob a fifth son. \bibleverse{18} Leah said, ``God has given me my
hire, because I gave my servant to my husband.'' She named him Issachar.
\bibleverse{19} Leah conceived again, and bore a sixth son to Jacob.
\bibleverse{20} Leah said, ``God has endowed me with a good dowry. Now
my husband will live with me, because I have borne him six sons.'' She
named him Zebulun. \bibleverse{21} Afterwards, she bore a daughter, and
named her Dinah.

\hypertarget{rachuxeal-grows-up-mother-of-josuxe9}{%
\subsection{Rachêl grows up mother of
José}\label{rachuxeal-grows-up-mother-of-josuxe9}}

\bibleverse{22} God remembered Rachel, and God listened to her, and
opened her womb. \bibleverse{23} She conceived, bore a son, and said,
``God has taken away my reproach.'' \bibleverse{24} She named him
Joseph,\footnote{\textbf{30:24} Joseph means ``may he add''.} saying,
``May the \textsc{Lord} add another son to me.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-new-covenant-of-service-with-laban}{%
\subsection{Jacob's new covenant of service with
Laban}\label{jacobs-new-covenant-of-service-with-laban}}

\bibleverse{25} When Rachel had borne Joseph, Jacob said to Laban,
``Send me away, that I may go to my own place, and to my country.
\bibleverse{26} Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served
you, and let me go; for you know my service with which I have served
you.'' \bibleverse{27} Laban said to him, ``If now I have found favour
in your eyes, stay here, for I have divined that the \textsc{Lord} has
blessed me for your sake.'' \bibleverse{28} He said, ``Appoint me your
wages, and I will give it.'' \bibleverse{29} Jacob said to him, ``You
know how I have served you, and how your livestock have fared with me.
\bibleverse{30} For it was little which you had before I came, and it
has increased to a multitude. The \textsc{Lord} has blessed you wherever
I turned. Now when will I provide for my own house also?''
\bibleverse{31} Laban said, ``What shall I give you?'' Jacob said, ``You
shall not give me anything. If you will do this thing for me, I will
again feed your flock and keep it. \bibleverse{32} I will pass through
all your flock today, removing from there every speckled and spotted
one, and every black one amongst the sheep, and the spotted and speckled
amongst the goats. This will be my hire. \bibleverse{33} So my
righteousness will answer for me hereafter, when you come concerning my
hire that is before you. Every one that is not speckled and spotted
amongst the goats, and black amongst the sheep, that might be with me,
will be considered stolen.'' \bibleverse{34} Laban said, ``Behold, let
it be according to your word.''

\hypertarget{jacob-obtained-a-large-cattle-estate-through-cunning}{%
\subsection{Jacob obtained a large cattle estate through
cunning}\label{jacob-obtained-a-large-cattle-estate-through-cunning}}

\bibleverse{35} That day, he removed the male goats that were streaked
and spotted, and all the female goats that were speckled and spotted,
every one that had white in it, and all the black ones amongst the
sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons. \bibleverse{36} He set
three days' journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob fed the rest of
Laban's flocks. \bibleverse{37} Jacob took to himself rods of fresh
poplar, almond, and plane tree, peeled white streaks in them, and made
the white appear which was in the rods. \bibleverse{38} He set the rods
which he had peeled opposite the flocks in the watering troughs where
the flocks came to drink. They conceived when they came to drink.
\bibleverse{39} The flocks conceived before the rods, and the flocks
produced streaked, speckled, and spotted. \bibleverse{40} Jacob
separated the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks towards the
streaked and all the black in Laban's flock. He put his own droves
apart, and didn't put them into Laban's flock. \bibleverse{41} Whenever
the stronger of the flock conceived, Jacob laid the rods in front of the
eyes of the flock in the watering troughs, that they might conceive
amongst the rods; \bibleverse{42} but when the flock were feeble, he
didn't put them in. So the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger
Jacob's. \bibleverse{43} The man increased exceedingly, and had large
flocks, female servants and male servants, and camels and donkeys.

\hypertarget{the-reasons-for-jacobs-flight}{%
\subsection{The reasons for Jacob's
flight}\label{the-reasons-for-jacobs-flight}}

\hypertarget{section-30}{%
\section{31}\label{section-30}}

\bibleverse{1} Jacob heard Laban's sons' words, saying, ``Jacob has
taken away all that was our father's. He has obtained all this wealth
from that which was our father's.'' \bibleverse{2} Jacob saw the
expression on Laban's face, and, behold, it was not towards him as
before. \bibleverse{3} The \textsc{Lord} said to Jacob, ``Return to the
land of your fathers, and to your relatives, and I will be with you.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-consultation-with-his-wives}{%
\subsection{Jacob's consultation with his
wives}\label{jacobs-consultation-with-his-wives}}

\bibleverse{4} Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field to his
flock, \bibleverse{5} and said to them, ``I see the expression on your
father's face, that it is not towards me as before; but the God of my
father has been with me. \bibleverse{6} You know that I have served your
father with all of my strength. \bibleverse{7} Your father has deceived
me, and changed my wages ten times, but God didn't allow him to hurt me.
\bibleverse{8} If he said, `The speckled will be your wages,' then all
the flock bore speckled. If he said, `The streaked will be your wages,'
then all the flock bore streaked. \bibleverse{9} Thus God has taken away
your father's livestock, and given them to me. \bibleverse{10} During
mating season, I lifted up my eyes, and saw in a dream, and behold, the
male goats which leapt on the flock were streaked, speckled, and
grizzled. \bibleverse{11} The angel of God said to me in the dream,
`Jacob,' and I said, `Here I am.' \bibleverse{12} He said, `Now lift up
your eyes, and behold, all the male goats which leap on the flock are
streaked, speckled, and grizzled, for I have seen all that Laban does to
you. \bibleverse{13} I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed a
pillar, where you vowed a vow to me. Now arise, get out from this land,
and return to the land of your birth.'\,'' \bibleverse{14} Rachel and
Leah answered him, ``Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in
our father's house? \bibleverse{15} Aren't we considered as foreigners
by him? For he has sold us, and has also used up our money.
\bibleverse{16} For all the riches which God has taken away from our
father are ours and our children's. Now then, whatever God has said to
you, do.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-flight-and-labans-persecution}{%
\subsection{Jacob's Flight and Laban's
Persecution}\label{jacobs-flight-and-labans-persecution}}

\bibleverse{17} Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives on
the camels, \bibleverse{18} and he took away all his livestock, and all
his possessions which he had gathered, including the livestock which he
had gained in Paddan Aram, to go to Isaac his father, to the land of
Canaan. \bibleverse{19} Now Laban had gone to shear his sheep; and
Rachel stole the teraphim\footnote{\textbf{31:19} teraphim were
  household idols that may have been associated with inheritance rights
  to the household property.} that were her father's. \bibleverse{20}
Jacob deceived Laban the Syrian, in that he didn't tell him that he was
running away. \bibleverse{21} So he fled with all that he had. He rose
up, passed over the River, and set his face towards the mountain of
Gilead. \bibleverse{22} Laban was told on the third day that Jacob had
fled. \bibleverse{23} He took his relatives with him, and pursued him
seven days' journey. He overtook him in the mountain of Gilead.
\bibleverse{24} God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream of the night,
and said to him, ``Be careful that you don't speak to Jacob either good
or bad.''

\hypertarget{labans-punishing-speech-and-house-search}{%
\subsection{Laban's punishing speech and house
search}\label{labans-punishing-speech-and-house-search}}

\bibleverse{25} Laban caught up with Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his
tent in the mountain, and Laban with his relatives encamped in the
mountain of Gilead. \bibleverse{26} Laban said to Jacob, ``What have you
done, that you have deceived me, and carried away my daughters like
captives of the sword? \bibleverse{27} Why did you flee secretly, and
deceive me, and didn't tell me, that I might have sent you away with
mirth and with songs, with tambourine and with harp; \bibleverse{28} and
didn't allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters? Now have you done
foolishly. \bibleverse{29} It is in the power of my hand to hurt you,
but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, `Be careful
that you don't speak to Jacob either good or bad.' \bibleverse{30} Now,
you want to be gone, because you greatly longed for your father's house,
but why have you stolen my gods?'' \bibleverse{31} Jacob answered Laban,
``Because I was afraid, for I said, `Lest you should take your daughters
from me by force.' \bibleverse{32} Anyone you find your gods with shall
not live. Before our relatives, discern what is yours with me, and take
it.'' For Jacob didn't know that Rachel had stolen them. \bibleverse{33}
Laban went into Jacob's tent, into Leah's tent, and into the tent of the
two female servants; but he didn't find them. He went out of Leah's
tent, and entered into Rachel's tent. \bibleverse{34} Now Rachel had
taken the teraphim, put them in the camel's saddle, and sat on them.
Laban felt around all the tent, but didn't find them. \bibleverse{35}
She said to her father, ``Don't let my lord be angry that I can't rise
up before you; for I'm having my period.'' He searched, but didn't find
the teraphim.

\hypertarget{jacobs-impeachment-speech}{%
\subsection{Jacob's Impeachment
Speech}\label{jacobs-impeachment-speech}}

\bibleverse{36} Jacob was angry, and argued with Laban. Jacob answered
Laban, ``What is my trespass? What is my sin, that you have hotly
pursued me? \bibleverse{37} Now that you have felt around in all my
stuff, what have you found of all your household stuff? Set it here
before my relatives and your relatives, that they may judge between us
two. \bibleverse{38} ``These twenty years I have been with you. Your
ewes and your female goats have not cast their young, and I haven't
eaten the rams of your flocks. \bibleverse{39} That which was torn of
animals, I didn't bring to you. I bore its loss. Of my hand you required
it, whether stolen by day or stolen by night. \bibleverse{40} This was
my situation: in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep fled from my eyes. \bibleverse{41} These twenty
years I have been in your house. I served you fourteen years for your
two daughters, and six years for your flock, and you have changed my
wages ten times. \bibleverse{42} Unless the God of my father, the God of
Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely now you would
have sent me away empty. God has seen my affliction and the labour of my
hands, and rebuked you last night.''

\hypertarget{labans-reply-the-peace-treaty-between-him-and-jacob}{%
\subsection{Laban's reply; the peace treaty between him and
Jacob}\label{labans-reply-the-peace-treaty-between-him-and-jacob}}

\bibleverse{43} Laban answered Jacob, ``The daughters are my daughters,
the children are my children, the flocks are my flocks, and all that you
see is mine! What can I do today to these my daughters, or to their
children whom they have borne? \bibleverse{44} Now come, let's make a
covenant, you and I. Let it be for a witness between me and you.''
\bibleverse{45} Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
\bibleverse{46} Jacob said to his relatives, ``Gather stones.'' They
took stones, and made a heap. They ate there by the heap.
\bibleverse{47} Laban called it Jegar Sahadutha,\footnote{\textbf{31:47}
  ``Jegar Sahadutha'' means ``Witness Heap'' in Aramaic.} but Jacob
called it Galeed.\footnote{\textbf{31:47} ``Galeed'' means ``Witness
  Heap'' in Hebrew.} \bibleverse{48} Laban said, ``This heap is witness
between me and you today.'' Therefore it was named Galeed
\bibleverse{49} and Mizpah, for he said, ``The \textsc{Lord} watch
between me and you, when we are absent one from another. \bibleverse{50}
If you afflict my daughters, or if you take wives in addition to my
daughters, no man is with us; behold, God is witness between me and
you.'' \bibleverse{51} Laban said to Jacob, ``See this heap, and see the
pillar, which I have set between me and you. \bibleverse{52} May this
heap be a witness, and the pillar be a witness, that I will not pass
over this heap to you, and that you will not pass over this heap and
this pillar to me, for harm. \bibleverse{53} The God of Abraham, and the
God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us.'' Then Jacob
swore by the fear of his father, Isaac. \bibleverse{54} Jacob offered a
sacrifice in the mountain, and called his relatives to eat bread. They
ate bread, and stayed all night in the mountain. \bibleverse{55} Early
in the morning, Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters,
and blessed them. Laban departed and returned to his place.

\hypertarget{jacob-sends-messengers-to-esau}{%
\subsection{Jacob sends messengers to
Esau}\label{jacob-sends-messengers-to-esau}}

\hypertarget{section-31}{%
\section{32}\label{section-31}}

\bibleverse{1} Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
\bibleverse{2} When he saw them, Jacob said, ``This is God's army.'' He
called the name of that place Mahanaim.\footnote{\textbf{32:2}
  ``Mahanaim'' means ``two camps''.} \bibleverse{3} Jacob sent
messengers in front of him to Esau, his brother, to the land of Seir,
the field of Edom. \bibleverse{4} He commanded them, saying, ``This is
what you shall tell my lord, Esau: `This is what your servant, Jacob,
says. I have lived as a foreigner with Laban, and stayed until now.
\bibleverse{5} I have cattle, donkeys, flocks, male servants, and female
servants. I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favour in your
sight.'\,'' \bibleverse{6} The messengers returned to Jacob, saying,
``We came to your brother Esau. He is coming to meet you, and four
hundred men are with him.'' \bibleverse{7} Then Jacob was greatly afraid
and was distressed. He divided the people who were with him, along with
the flocks, the herds, and the camels, into two companies.
\bibleverse{8} He said, ``If Esau comes to the one company, and strikes
it, then the company which is left will escape.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-prayer-for-gods-help}{%
\subsection{Jacob's prayer for God's
help}\label{jacobs-prayer-for-gods-help}}

\bibleverse{9} Jacob said, ``God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, the \textsc{Lord}, who said to me, `Return to your
country, and to your relatives, and I will do you good,' \bibleverse{10}
I am not worthy of the least of all the loving kindnesses, and of all
the truth, which you have shown to your servant; for with just my staff
I crossed over this Jordan; and now I have become two companies.
\bibleverse{11} Please deliver me from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of Esau; for I fear him, lest he come and strike me and the mothers
with the children. \bibleverse{12} You said, `I will surely do you good,
and make your offspring as the sand of the sea, which can't be counted
because there are so many.'\,''

\hypertarget{jacob-sends-gifts-to-esau}{%
\subsection{Jacob sends gifts to Esau}\label{jacob-sends-gifts-to-esau}}

\bibleverse{13} He stayed there that night, and took from that which he
had with him a present for Esau, his brother: \bibleverse{14} two
hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty
rams, \bibleverse{15} thirty milk camels and their colts, forty cows,
ten bulls, twenty female donkeys and ten foals. \bibleverse{16} He
delivered them into the hands of his servants, every herd by itself, and
said to his servants, ``Pass over before me, and put a space between
herd and herd.'' \bibleverse{17} He commanded the foremost, saying,
``When Esau, my brother, meets you, and asks you, saying, `Whose are
you? Where are you going? Whose are these before you?' \bibleverse{18}
Then you shall say, `They are your servant, Jacob's. It is a present
sent to my lord, Esau. Behold, he also is behind us.'\,''
\bibleverse{19} He commanded also the second, and the third, and all
that followed the herds, saying, ``This is how you shall speak to Esau,
when you find him. \bibleverse{20} You shall say, `Not only that, but
behold, your servant, Jacob, is behind us.'\,'' For, he said, ``I will
appease him with the present that goes before me, and afterward I will
see his face. Perhaps he will accept me.'' \bibleverse{21} So the
present passed over before him, and he himself stayed that night in the
camp.

\hypertarget{jacob-wrestling-with-god-at-night}{%
\subsection{Jacob wrestling with God at
night}\label{jacob-wrestling-with-god-at-night}}

\bibleverse{22} He rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his
two servants, and his eleven sons, and crossed over the ford of the
Jabbok. \bibleverse{23} He took them, and sent them over the stream, and
sent over that which he had. \bibleverse{24} Jacob was left alone, and
wrestled with a man there until the breaking of the day. \bibleverse{25}
When he saw that he didn't prevail against him, the man touched the
hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was strained as he
wrestled. \bibleverse{26} The man said, ``Let me go, for the day
breaks.'' Jacob said, ``I won't let you go unless you bless me.''
\bibleverse{27} He said to him, ``What is your name?'' He said,
``Jacob''. \bibleverse{28} He said, ``Your name will no longer be called
Jacob, but Israel; for you have fought with God and with men, and have
prevailed.'' \bibleverse{29} Jacob asked him, ``Please tell me your
name.'' He said, ``Why is it that you ask what my name is?'' So he
blessed him there. \bibleverse{30} Jacob called the name of the place
Peniel;\footnote{\textbf{32:30} Peniel means ``face of God''.} for he
said, ``I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.''
\bibleverse{31} The sun rose on him as he passed over Peniel, and he
limped because of his thigh. \bibleverse{32} Therefore the children of
Israel don't eat the sinew of the hip, which is on the hollow of the
thigh, to this day, because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in
the sinew of the hip.

\hypertarget{jacobs-reconciliation-with-esau}{%
\subsection{Jacob's reconciliation with
Esau}\label{jacobs-reconciliation-with-esau}}

\hypertarget{section-32}{%
\section{33}\label{section-32}}

\bibleverse{1} Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau
was coming, and with him four hundred men. He divided the children
between Leah, Rachel, and the two servants. \bibleverse{2} He put the
servants and their children in front, Leah and her children after, and
Rachel and Joseph at the rear. \bibleverse{3} He himself passed over in
front of them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he
came near to his brother. \bibleverse{4} Esau ran to meet him, embraced
him, fell on his neck, kissed him, and they wept. \bibleverse{5} He
lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, ``Who
are these with you?'' He said, ``The children whom God has graciously
given your servant.'' \bibleverse{6} Then the servants came near with
their children, and they bowed themselves. \bibleverse{7} Leah also and
her children came near, and bowed themselves. After them, Joseph came
near with Rachel, and they bowed themselves. \bibleverse{8} Esau said,
``What do you mean by all this company which I met?'' Jacob said, ``To
find favour in the sight of my lord.'' \bibleverse{9} Esau said, ``I
have enough, my brother; let that which you have be yours.''
\bibleverse{10} Jacob said, ``Please, no, if I have now found favour in
your sight, then receive my present at my hand, because I have seen your
face, as one sees the face of God, and you were pleased with me.
\bibleverse{11} Please take the gift that I brought to you, because God
has dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough.'' He urged him,
and he took it.

\hypertarget{jacob-refuses-to-escort-esau-this-returns-to-seir}{%
\subsection{Jacob refuses to escort Esau; this returns to
Seir}\label{jacob-refuses-to-escort-esau-this-returns-to-seir}}

\bibleverse{12} Esau said, ``Let's take our journey, and let's go, and I
will go before you.'' \bibleverse{13} Jacob said to him, ``My lord knows
that the children are tender, and that the flocks and herds with me have
their young, and if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will
die. \bibleverse{14} Please let my lord pass over before his servant,
and I will lead on gently, according to the pace of the livestock that
are before me and according to the pace of the children, until I come to
my lord to Seir.'' \bibleverse{15} Esau said, ``Let me now leave with
you some of the people who are with me.'' He said, ``Why? Let me find
favour in the sight of my lord.'' \bibleverse{16} So Esau returned that
day on his way to Seir.

\hypertarget{jacob-moves-to-succoth-and-settles-with-shechuxeam}{%
\subsection{Jacob moves to Succoth and settles with
Shechêm}\label{jacob-moves-to-succoth-and-settles-with-shechuxeam}}

\bibleverse{17} Jacob travelled to Succoth, built himself a house, and
made shelters for his livestock. Therefore the name of the place is
called Succoth.\footnote{\textbf{33:17} succoth means shelters or
  booths.} \bibleverse{18} Jacob came in peace to the city of Shechem,
which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan Aram; and
encamped before the city. \bibleverse{19} He bought the parcel of ground
where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor,
Shechem's father, for one hundred pieces of money. \bibleverse{20} He
erected an altar there, and called it El Elohe Israel.\footnote{\textbf{33:20}
  El Elohe Israel means ``God, the God of Israel'' or ``The God of
  Israel is mighty''.}

\hypertarget{shichems-offense-against-dinah}{%
\subsection{Shichem's offense against
Dinah}\label{shichems-offense-against-dinah}}

\hypertarget{section-33}{%
\section{34}\label{section-33}}

\bibleverse{1} Dinah, the daughter of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land. \bibleverse{2} Shechem the son of
Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her. He took her, lay with
her, and humbled her. \bibleverse{3} His soul joined to Dinah, the
daughter of Jacob, and he loved the young lady, and spoke kindly to the
young lady. \bibleverse{4} Shechem spoke to his father, Hamor, saying,
``Get me this young lady as a wife.'' \bibleverse{5} Now Jacob heard
that he had defiled Dinah, his daughter; and his sons were with his
livestock in the field. Jacob held his peace until they came.

\hypertarget{hemor-woos-dinah-of-the-sons-of-jacob}{%
\subsection{Hemor woos Dinah of the sons of
Jacob}\label{hemor-woos-dinah-of-the-sons-of-jacob}}

\bibleverse{6} Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to talk
with him. \bibleverse{7} The sons of Jacob came in from the field when
they heard it. The men were grieved, and they were very angry, because
he had done folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter, a thing that
ought not to be done. \bibleverse{8} Hamor talked with them, saying,
``The soul of my son, Shechem, longs for your daughter. Please give her
to him as a wife. \bibleverse{9} Make marriages with us. Give your
daughters to us, and take our daughters for yourselves. \bibleverse{10}
You shall dwell with us, and the land will be before you. Live and trade
in it, and get possessions in it.'' \bibleverse{11} Shechem said to her
father and to her brothers, ``Let me find favour in your eyes, and
whatever you will tell me I will give. \bibleverse{12} Ask me a great
amount for a dowry, and I will give whatever you ask of me, but give me
the young lady as a wife.''

\hypertarget{the-request-of-the-sons-of-jacob-is-accepted-by-the-shechemites}{%
\subsection{The request of the sons of Jacob is accepted by the
Shechemites}\label{the-request-of-the-sons-of-jacob-is-accepted-by-the-shechemites}}

\bibleverse{13} The sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father
with deceit when they spoke, because he had defiled Dinah their sister,
\bibleverse{14} and said to them, ``We can't do this thing, to give our
sister to one who is uncircumcised; for that is a reproach to us.
\bibleverse{15} Only on this condition will we consent to you. If you
will be as we are, that every male of you be circumcised,
\bibleverse{16} then will we give our daughters to you; and we will take
your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one
people. \bibleverse{17} But if you will not listen to us and be
circumcised, then we will take our sister,\footnote{\textbf{34:17}
  Hebrew has, literally, ``daughter''} and we will be gone.''
\bibleverse{18} Their words pleased Hamor and Shechem, Hamor's son.
\bibleverse{19} The young man didn't wait to do this thing, because he
had delight in Jacob's daughter, and he was honoured above all the house
of his father. \bibleverse{20} Hamor and Shechem, his son, came to the
gate of their city, and talked with the men of their city, saying,
\bibleverse{21} ``These men are peaceful with us. Therefore let them
live in the land and trade in it. For behold, the land is large enough
for them. Let's take their daughters to us for wives, and let's give
them our daughters. \bibleverse{22} Only on this condition will the men
consent to us to live with us, to become one people, if every male
amongst us is circumcised, as they are circumcised. \bibleverse{23}
Won't their livestock and their possessions and all their animals be
ours? Only let's give our consent to them, and they will dwell with
us.'' \bibleverse{24} All who went out of the gate of his city listened
to Hamor, and to Shechem his son; and every male was circumcised, all
who went out of the gate of his city.

\hypertarget{the-deceitful-revenge-of-the-sons-of-jacob}{%
\subsection{The deceitful revenge of the sons of
Jacob}\label{the-deceitful-revenge-of-the-sons-of-jacob}}

\bibleverse{25} On the third day, when they were sore, two of Jacob's
sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, each took his sword, came upon
the unsuspecting city, and killed all the males. \bibleverse{26} They
killed Hamor and Shechem, his son, with the edge of the sword, and took
Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went away. \bibleverse{27} Jacob's
sons came on the dead, and plundered the city, because they had defiled
their sister. \bibleverse{28} They took their flocks, their herds, their
donkeys, that which was in the city, that which was in the field,
\bibleverse{29} and all their wealth. They took captive all their little
ones and their wives, and took as plunder everything that was in the
house.

\hypertarget{jacobs-disgust-at-his-sons-reprehensible-act}{%
\subsection{Jacob's disgust at his sons' reprehensible
act}\label{jacobs-disgust-at-his-sons-reprehensible-act}}

\bibleverse{30} Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, ``You have troubled me,
to make me odious to the inhabitants of the land, amongst the Canaanites
and the Perizzites. I am few in number. They will gather themselves
together against me and strike me, and I will be destroyed, I and my
house.'' \bibleverse{31} They said, ``Should he deal with our sister as
with a prostitute?''

\hypertarget{by-gods-admonition-jacob-departs-from-shechem}{%
\subsection{By God's admonition, Jacob departs from
Shechem}\label{by-gods-admonition-jacob-departs-from-shechem}}

\hypertarget{section-34}{%
\section{35}\label{section-34}}

\bibleverse{1} God said to Jacob, ``Arise, go up to Bethel, and live
there. Make there an altar to God, who appeared to you when you fled
from the face of Esau your brother.'' \bibleverse{2} Then Jacob said to
his household, and to all who were with him, ``Put away the foreign gods
that are amongst you, purify yourselves, change your garments.
\bibleverse{3} Let's arise, and go up to Bethel. I will make there an
altar to God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me
on the way which I went.'' \bibleverse{4} They gave to Jacob all the
foreign gods which were in their hands, and the rings which were in
their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
\bibleverse{5} They travelled, and a terror of God was on the cities
that were around them, and they didn't pursue the sons of Jacob.

\hypertarget{arrival-of-jacob-and-construction-of-the-altar-at-bethel}{%
\subsection{Arrival of Jacob and construction of the altar at
Bethel}\label{arrival-of-jacob-and-construction-of-the-altar-at-bethel}}

\bibleverse{6} So Jacob came to Luz (that is, Bethel), which is in the
land of Canaan, he and all the people who were with him. \bibleverse{7}
He built an altar there, and called the place El Beth El; because there
God was revealed to him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
\bibleverse{8} Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died, and she was buried below
Bethel under the oak; and its name was called Allon Bacuth.

\hypertarget{jacob-blessed-by-god}{%
\subsection{Jacob blessed by God}\label{jacob-blessed-by-god}}

\bibleverse{9} God appeared to Jacob again, when he came from Paddan
Aram, and blessed him. \bibleverse{10} God said to him, ``Your name is
Jacob. Your name shall not be Jacob any more, but your name will be
Israel.'' He named him Israel. \bibleverse{11} God said to him, ``I am
God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply. A nation and a company of
nations will be from you, and kings will come out of your body.
\bibleverse{12} The land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give
it to you, and to your offspring after you I will give the land.''
\bibleverse{13} God went up from him in the place where he spoke with
him. \bibleverse{14} Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he spoke
with him, a pillar of stone. He poured out a drink offering on it, and
poured oil on it. \bibleverse{15} Jacob called the name of the place
where God spoke with him ``Bethel''.

\hypertarget{departure-from-bethel-rahel-dies-giving-birth-to-benjamin}{%
\subsection{Departure from Bethel; Rahel dies giving birth to
Benjamin}\label{departure-from-bethel-rahel-dies-giving-birth-to-benjamin}}

\bibleverse{16} They travelled from Bethel. There was still some
distance to come to Ephrath, and Rachel travailed. She had hard labour.
\bibleverse{17} When she was in hard labour, the midwife said to her,
``Don't be afraid, for now you will have another son.'' \bibleverse{18}
As her soul was departing (for she died), she named him
Benoni,\footnote{\textbf{35:18} ``Benoni'' means ``son of my trouble''.}
but his father named him Benjamin.\footnote{\textbf{35:18} ``Benjamin''
  means ``son of my right hand''.} \bibleverse{19} Rachel died, and was
buried on the way to Ephrath (also called Bethlehem). \bibleverse{20}
Jacob set up a pillar on her grave. The same is the Pillar of Rachel's
grave to this day.

\hypertarget{the-indignation-of-rubens-the-twelve-sons-of-jacob-his-return-to-hebron-isaacs-death-and-burial}{%
\subsection{The indignation of Rubens; The twelve sons of Jacob; his
return to Hebron; Isaac's death and
burial}\label{the-indignation-of-rubens-the-twelve-sons-of-jacob-his-return-to-hebron-isaacs-death-and-burial}}

\bibleverse{21} Israel travelled, and spread his tent beyond the tower
of Eder. \bibleverse{22} While Israel lived in that land, Reuben went
and lay with Bilhah, his father's concubine, and Israel heard of it. Now
the sons of Jacob were twelve. \bibleverse{23} The sons of Leah: Reuben
(Jacob's firstborn), Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun.
\bibleverse{24} The sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin. \bibleverse{25}
The sons of Bilhah (Rachel's servant): Dan and Naphtali. \bibleverse{26}
The sons of Zilpah (Leah's servant): Gad and Asher. These are the sons
of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan Aram. \bibleverse{27} Jacob
came to Isaac his father, to Mamre, to Kiriath Arba (which is Hebron),
where Abraham and Isaac lived as foreigners. \bibleverse{28} The days of
Isaac were one hundred and eighty years. \bibleverse{29} Isaac gave up
the spirit and died, and was gathered to his people, old and full of
days. Esau and Jacob, his sons, buried him.

\hypertarget{esaus-family-and-residence}{%
\subsection{Esau's family and
residence}\label{esaus-family-and-residence}}

\hypertarget{section-35}{%
\section{36}\label{section-35}}

\bibleverse{1} Now this is the history of the generations of Esau (that
is, Edom). \bibleverse{2} Esau took his wives from the daughters of
Canaan: Adah the daughter of Elon, the Hittite; and Oholibamah the
daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, the Hivite; \bibleverse{3} and
Basemath, Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth. \bibleverse{4} Adah
bore to Esau Eliphaz. Basemath bore Reuel. \bibleverse{5} Oholibamah
bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. These are the sons of Esau, who were born
to him in the land of Canaan. \bibleverse{6} Esau took his wives, his
sons, his daughters, and all the members of his household, with his
livestock, all his animals, and all his possessions, which he had
gathered in the land of Canaan, and went into a land away from his
brother Jacob. \bibleverse{7} For their substance was too great for them
to dwell together, and the land of their travels couldn't bear them
because of their livestock. \bibleverse{8} Esau lived in the hill
country of Seir. Esau is Edom.

\hypertarget{esaus-children-and-grandchildren-as-parents}{%
\subsection{Esau's children and grandchildren as
parents}\label{esaus-children-and-grandchildren-as-parents}}

\bibleverse{9} This is the history of the generations of Esau the father
of the Edomites in the hill country of Seir: \bibleverse{10} these are
the names of Esau's sons: Eliphaz, the son of Adah, the wife of Esau;
and Reuel, the son of Basemath, the wife of Esau. \bibleverse{11} The
sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
\bibleverse{12} Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's son; and she bore
to Eliphaz Amalek. These are the descendants of Adah, Esau's wife.
\bibleverse{13} These are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and
Mizzah. These were the descendants of Basemath, Esau's wife.
\bibleverse{14} These were the sons of Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah,
the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: she bore to Esau Jeush, Jalam, and
Korah.

\hypertarget{dukes-descended-from-esau}{%
\subsection{Dukes descended from Esau}\label{dukes-descended-from-esau}}

\bibleverse{15} These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau: the sons of
Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau: chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho,
chief Kenaz, \bibleverse{16} chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek.
These are the chiefs who came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are
the sons of Adah. \bibleverse{17} These are the sons of Reuel, Esau's
son: chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah. These are
the chiefs who came of Reuel in the land of Edom. These are the sons of
Basemath, Esau's wife. \bibleverse{18} These are the sons of Oholibamah,
Esau's wife: chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah. These are the chiefs
who came of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
\bibleverse{19} These are the sons of Esau (that is, Edom), and these
are their chiefs.

\hypertarget{the-horites-who-were-independent-of-esau}{%
\subsection{The Horites who were independent of
Esau}\label{the-horites-who-were-independent-of-esau}}

\bibleverse{20} These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants
of the land: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, \bibleverse{21} Dishon, Ezer,
and Dishan. These are the chiefs who came of the Horites, the children
of Seir in the land of Edom. \bibleverse{22} The children of Lotan were
Hori and Heman. Lotan's sister was Timna. \bibleverse{23} These are the
children of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
\bibleverse{24} These are the children of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. This is
Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness, as he fed the donkeys
of Zibeon his father. \bibleverse{25} These are the children of Anah:
Dishon and Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah. \bibleverse{26} These are
the children of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran.
\bibleverse{27} These are the children of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and
Akan. \bibleverse{28} These are the children of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
\bibleverse{29} These are the chiefs who came of the Horites: chief
Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah, \bibleverse{30} chief
Dishon, chief Ezer, and chief Dishan. These are the chiefs who came of
the Horites, according to their chiefs in the land of Seir.

\hypertarget{the-kings-of-the-land-from-edom-to-david}{%
\subsection{The kings of the land from Edom to
David}\label{the-kings-of-the-land-from-edom-to-david}}

\bibleverse{31} These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom,
before any king reigned over the children of Israel. \bibleverse{32}
Bela, the son of Beor, reigned in Edom. The name of his city was
Dinhabah. \bibleverse{33} Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zerah of
Bozrah, reigned in his place. \bibleverse{34} Jobab died, and Husham of
the land of the Temanites reigned in his place. \bibleverse{35} Husham
died, and Hadad, the son of Bedad, who struck Midian in the field of
Moab, reigned in his place. The name of his city was Avith.
\bibleverse{36} Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his place.
\bibleverse{37} Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the river, reigned
in his place. \bibleverse{38} Shaul died, and Baal Hanan the son of
Achbor reigned in his place. \bibleverse{39} Baal Hanan the son of
Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his place. The name of his city was
Pau. His wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter
of Mezahab.

\hypertarget{the-dukes-of-edom-for-their-places}{%
\subsection{The Dukes of Edom for their
places}\label{the-dukes-of-edom-for-their-places}}

\bibleverse{40} These are the names of the chiefs who came from Esau,
according to their families, after their places, and by their names:
chief Timna, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth, \bibleverse{41} chief
Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon, \bibleverse{42} chief Kenaz, chief
Teman, chief Mibzar, \bibleverse{43} chief Magdiel, and chief Iram.
These are the chiefs of Edom, according to their habitations in the land
of their possession. This is Esau, the father of the Edomites.

\hypertarget{the-beginnings-of-the-brothers-enmity-against-joseph}{%
\subsection{The beginnings of the brothers' enmity against
Joseph}\label{the-beginnings-of-the-brothers-enmity-against-joseph}}

\hypertarget{section-36}{%
\section{37}\label{section-36}}

\bibleverse{1} Jacob lived in the land of his father's travels, in the
land of Canaan. \bibleverse{2} This is the history of the generations of
Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his
brothers. He was a boy with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's
wives. Joseph brought an evil report of them to their father.
\bibleverse{3} Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children,
because he was the son of his old age, and he made him a tunic of many
colours. \bibleverse{4} His brothers saw that their father loved him
more than all his brothers, and they hated him, and couldn't speak
peaceably to him.

\hypertarget{joses-dreams}{%
\subsection{Jose's dreams}\label{joses-dreams}}

\bibleverse{5} Joseph dreamt a dream, and he told it to his brothers,
and they hated him all the more. \bibleverse{6} He said to them,
``Please hear this dream which I have dreamt: \bibleverse{7} for behold,
we were binding sheaves in the field, and behold, my sheaf arose and
also stood upright; and behold, your sheaves came around, and bowed down
to my sheaf.'' \bibleverse{8} His brothers asked him, ``Will you indeed
reign over us? Will you indeed have dominion over us?'' They hated him
all the more for his dreams and for his words. \bibleverse{9} He dreamt
yet another dream, and told it to his brothers, and said, ``Behold, I
have dreamt yet another dream: and behold, the sun and the moon and
eleven stars bowed down to me.'' \bibleverse{10} He told it to his
father and to his brothers. His father rebuked him, and said to him,
``What is this dream that you have dreamt? Will I and your mother and
your brothers indeed come to bow ourselves down to the earth before
you?'' \bibleverse{11} His brothers envied him, but his father kept this
saying in mind.

\hypertarget{chance-to-get-rid-of-joseph}{%
\subsection{Chance to get rid of
Joseph}\label{chance-to-get-rid-of-joseph}}

\bibleverse{12} His brothers went to feed their father's flock in
Shechem. \bibleverse{13} Israel said to Joseph, ``Aren't your brothers
feeding the flock in Shechem? Come, and I will send you to them.'' He
said to him, ``Here I am.'' \bibleverse{14} He said to him, ``Go now,
see whether it is well with your brothers, and well with the flock; and
bring me word again.'' So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, and
he came to Shechem. \bibleverse{15} A certain man found him, and behold,
he was wandering in the field. The man asked him, ``What are you looking
for?'' \bibleverse{16} He said, ``I am looking for my brothers. Tell me,
please, where they are feeding the flock.'' \bibleverse{17} The man
said, ``They have left here, for I heard them say, `Let's go to
Dothan.'\,'' Joseph went after his brothers, and found them in Dothan.
\bibleverse{18} They saw him afar off, and before he came near to them,
they conspired against him to kill him. \bibleverse{19} They said to one
another, ``Behold, this dreamer comes. \bibleverse{20} Come now
therefore, and let's kill him, and cast him into one of the pits, and we
will say, `An evil animal has devoured him.' We will see what will
become of his dreams.''

\hypertarget{reuben-and-judah-try-to-save-josuxe9}{%
\subsection{Reuben and Judah try to save
José}\label{reuben-and-judah-try-to-save-josuxe9}}

\bibleverse{21} Reuben heard it, and delivered him out of their hand,
and said, ``Let's not take his life.'' \bibleverse{22} Reuben said to
them, ``Shed no blood. Throw him into this pit that is in the
wilderness, but lay no hand on him''---that he might deliver him out of
their hand, to restore him to his father. \bibleverse{23} When Joseph
came to his brothers, they stripped Joseph of his tunic, the tunic of
many colours that was on him; \bibleverse{24} and they took him, and
threw him into the pit. The pit was empty. There was no water in it.
\bibleverse{25} They sat down to eat bread, and they lifted up their
eyes and looked, and saw a caravan of Ishmaelites was coming from
Gilead, with their camels bearing spices and balm and myrrh, going to
carry it down to Egypt. \bibleverse{26} Judah said to his brothers,
``What profit is it if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?
\bibleverse{27} Come, and let's sell him to the Ishmaelites, and not let
our hand be on him; for he is our brother, our flesh.'' His brothers
listened to him.

\hypertarget{joseph-is-sold-to-egypt}{%
\subsection{Joseph is sold to Egypt}\label{joseph-is-sold-to-egypt}}

\bibleverse{28} Midianites who were merchants passed by, and they drew
and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites
for twenty pieces of silver. The merchants brought Joseph into Egypt.
\bibleverse{29} Reuben returned to the pit, and saw that Joseph wasn't
in the pit; and he tore his clothes. \bibleverse{30} He returned to his
brothers, and said, ``The child is no more; and I, where will I go?''
\bibleverse{31} They took Joseph's tunic, and killed a male goat, and
dipped the tunic in the blood. \bibleverse{32} They took the tunic of
many colours, and they brought it to their father, and said, ``We have
found this. Examine it, now, and see if it is your son's tunic or not.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-pain-joseph-sold-to-potiphar-in-egypt}{%
\subsection{Jacob's pain; Joseph sold to Potiphar in
Egypt}\label{jacobs-pain-joseph-sold-to-potiphar-in-egypt}}

\bibleverse{33} He recognised it, and said, ``It is my son's tunic. An
evil animal has devoured him. Joseph is without doubt torn in pieces.''
\bibleverse{34} Jacob tore his clothes, and put sackcloth on his waist,
and mourned for his son many days. \bibleverse{35} All his sons and all
his daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted. He
said, ``For I will go down to Sheol\footnote{\textbf{37:35} Sheol is the
  place of the dead.} to my son, mourning.'' His father wept for him.
\bibleverse{36} The Midianites sold him into Egypt to Potiphar, an
officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.

\hypertarget{the-sons-of-judah-and-thamar}{%
\subsection{The sons of Judah and
Thamar}\label{the-sons-of-judah-and-thamar}}

\hypertarget{section-37}{%
\section{38}\label{section-37}}

\bibleverse{1} At that time, Judah went down from his brothers, and
visited a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah. \bibleverse{2}
There, Judah saw the daughter of a certain Canaanite man named Shua. He
took her, and went in to her. \bibleverse{3} She conceived, and bore a
son; and he named him Er. \bibleverse{4} She conceived again, and bore a
son; and she named him Onan. \bibleverse{5} She yet again bore a son,
and named him Shelah. He was at Chezib when she bore him. \bibleverse{6}
Judah took a wife for Er, his firstborn, and her name was Tamar.
\bibleverse{7} Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the \textsc{Lord}'s
sight. So the \textsc{Lord} killed him. \bibleverse{8} Judah said to
Onan, ``Go in to your brother's wife, and perform the duty of a
husband's brother to her, and raise up offspring for your brother.''
\bibleverse{9} Onan knew that the offspring wouldn't be his; and when he
went in to his brother's wife, he spilled his semen on the ground, lest
he should give offspring to his brother. \bibleverse{10} The thing which
he did was evil in the \textsc{Lord}'s sight, and he killed him also.
\bibleverse{11} Then Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law, ``Remain
a widow in your father's house, until Shelah, my son, is grown up;'' for
he said, ``Lest he also die, like his brothers.'' Tamar went and lived
in her father's house.

\hypertarget{thamar-uses-cunning-to-obtain-offspring-from-his-father-in-law-judah}{%
\subsection{Thamar uses cunning to obtain offspring from his
father-in-law
Judah}\label{thamar-uses-cunning-to-obtain-offspring-from-his-father-in-law-judah}}

\bibleverse{12} After many days, Shua's daughter, the wife of Judah,
died. Judah was comforted, and went up to his sheep shearers to Timnah,
he and his friend Hirah, the Adullamite. \bibleverse{13} Tamar was told,
``Behold, your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.''
\bibleverse{14} She took off the garments of her widowhood, and covered
herself with her veil, and wrapped herself, and sat in the gate of
Enaim, which is on the way to Timnah; for she saw that Shelah was grown
up, and she wasn't given to him as a wife. \bibleverse{15} When Judah
saw her, he thought that she was a prostitute, for she had covered her
face. \bibleverse{16} He turned to her by the way, and said, ``Please
come, let me come in to you,'' for he didn't know that she was his
daughter-in-law. She said, ``What will you give me, that you may come in
to me?'' \bibleverse{17} He said, ``I will send you a young goat from
the flock.'' She said, ``Will you give me a pledge, until you send it?''
\bibleverse{18} He said, ``What pledge will I give you?'' She said,
``Your signet and your cord, and your staff that is in your hand.'' He
gave them to her, and came in to her, and she conceived by him.
\bibleverse{19} She arose, and went away, and put off her veil from her,
and put on the garments of her widowhood. \bibleverse{20} Judah sent the
young goat by the hand of his friend, the Adullamite, to receive the
pledge from the woman's hand, but he didn't find her. \bibleverse{21}
Then he asked the men of her place, saying, ``Where is the prostitute,
that was at Enaim by the road?'' They said, ``There has been no
prostitute here.'' \bibleverse{22} He returned to Judah, and said, ``I
haven't found her; and also the men of the place said, `There has been
no prostitute here.'\,'' \bibleverse{23} Judah said, ``Let her keep it,
lest we be shamed. Behold, I sent this young goat, and you haven't found
her.''

\hypertarget{judas-righteous-judgment-on-himself-and-thamar}{%
\subsection{Judas righteous judgment on himself and
Thamar}\label{judas-righteous-judgment-on-himself-and-thamar}}

\bibleverse{24} About three months later, Judah was told, ``Tamar, your
daughter-in-law, has played the prostitute. Moreover, behold, she is
with child by prostitution.'' Judah said, ``Bring her out, and let her
be burnt.'' \bibleverse{25} When she was brought out, she sent to her
father-in-law, saying, ``I am with child by the man who owns these.''
She also said, ``Please discern whose these are---the signet, and the
cords, and the staff.'' \bibleverse{26} Judah acknowledged them, and
said, ``She is more righteous than I, because I didn't give her to
Shelah, my son.'' He knew her again no more.

\hypertarget{thamar-gives-birth-to-twins-puxe9rez-and-serah}{%
\subsection{Thamar gives birth to twins Pérez and
Serah}\label{thamar-gives-birth-to-twins-puxe9rez-and-serah}}

\bibleverse{27} In the time of her travail, behold, twins were in her
womb. \bibleverse{28} When she travailed, one put out a hand, and the
midwife took and tied a scarlet thread on his hand, saying, ``This came
out first.'' \bibleverse{29} As he drew back his hand, behold, his
brother came out, and she said, ``Why have you made a breach for
yourself?'' Therefore his name was called Perez.\footnote{\textbf{38:29}
  Perez means ``breaking out''.} \bibleverse{30} Afterward his brother
came out, who had the scarlet thread on his hand, and his name was
called Zerah.\footnote{\textbf{38:30} Zerah means ``scarlet'' or
  ``brightness''.}

\hypertarget{joseph-in-potiphars-house}{%
\subsection{Joseph in Potiphar's
house}\label{joseph-in-potiphars-house}}

\hypertarget{section-38}{%
\section{39}\label{section-38}}

\bibleverse{1} Joseph was brought down to Egypt. Potiphar, an officer of
Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him from the
hand of the Ishmaelites that had brought him down there. \bibleverse{2}
The \textsc{Lord} was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man. He was
in the house of his master the Egyptian. \bibleverse{3} His master saw
that the \textsc{Lord} was with him, and that the \textsc{Lord} made all
that he did prosper in his hand. \bibleverse{4} Joseph found favour in
his sight. He ministered to him, and Potiphar made him overseer over his
house, and all that he had he put into his hand. \bibleverse{5} From the
time that he made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had,
the \textsc{Lord} blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake. The
\textsc{Lord}'s blessing was on all that he had, in the house and in the
field. \bibleverse{6} He left all that he had in Joseph's hand. He
didn't concern himself with anything, except for the food which he ate.
Joseph was well-built and handsome.

\hypertarget{the-seduction-of-potiphars-wife}{%
\subsection{The Seduction of Potiphar's
Wife}\label{the-seduction-of-potiphars-wife}}

\bibleverse{7} After these things, his master's wife set her eyes on
Joseph; and she said, ``Lie with me.'' \bibleverse{8} But he refused,
and said to his master's wife, ``Behold, my master doesn't know what is
with me in the house, and he has put all that he has into my hand.
\bibleverse{9} No one is greater in this house than I am, and he has not
kept back anything from me but you, because you are his wife. How then
can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?'' \bibleverse{10}
As she spoke to Joseph day by day, he didn't listen to her, to lie by
her, or to be with her. \bibleverse{11} About this time, he went into
the house to do his work, and there were none of the men of the house
inside. \bibleverse{12} She caught him by his garment, saying, ``Lie
with me!'' He left his garment in her hand, and ran outside.
\bibleverse{13} When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand,
and had run outside, \bibleverse{14} she called to the men of her house,
and spoke to them, saying, ``Behold, he has brought a Hebrew in to us to
mock us. He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice.
\bibleverse{15} When he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, he
left his garment by me, and ran outside.'' \bibleverse{16} She laid up
his garment by her, until his master came home. \bibleverse{17} She
spoke to him according to these words, saying, ``The Hebrew servant,
whom you have brought to us, came in to me to mock me, \bibleverse{18}
and as I lifted up my voice and cried, he left his garment by me, and
ran outside.''

\hypertarget{jose-in-jail}{%
\subsection{Jose in Jail}\label{jose-in-jail}}

\bibleverse{19} When his master heard the words of his wife, which she
spoke to him, saying, ``This is what your servant did to me,'' his wrath
was kindled. \bibleverse{20} Joseph's master took him, and put him into
the prison, the place where the king's prisoners were bound, and he was
there in custody. \bibleverse{21} But the \textsc{Lord} was with Joseph,
and showed kindness to him, and gave him favour in the sight of the
keeper of the prison. \bibleverse{22} The keeper of the prison committed
to Joseph's hand all the prisoners who were in the prison. Whatever they
did there, he was responsible for it. \bibleverse{23} The keeper of the
prison didn't look after anything that was under his hand, because the
\textsc{Lord} was with him; and that which he did, the \textsc{Lord}
made it prosper.

\hypertarget{imprisonment-of-pharaohs-cupbearer-and-baker}{%
\subsection{Imprisonment of Pharaoh's cupbearer and
baker}\label{imprisonment-of-pharaohs-cupbearer-and-baker}}

\hypertarget{section-39}{%
\section{40}\label{section-39}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, the butler of the king of Egypt and
his baker offended their lord, the king of Egypt. \bibleverse{2} Pharaoh
was angry with his two officers, the chief cup bearer and the chief
baker. \bibleverse{3} He put them in custody in the house of the captain
of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
\bibleverse{4} The captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph, and he
took care of them. They stayed in prison many days.

\hypertarget{josuxe9-comforts-the-two-court-officials}{%
\subsection{José comforts the two court
officials}\label{josuxe9-comforts-the-two-court-officials}}

\bibleverse{5} They both dreamt a dream, each man his dream, in one
night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the cup
bearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were bound in the prison.
\bibleverse{6} Joseph came in to them in the morning, and saw them, and
saw that they were sad. \bibleverse{7} He asked Pharaoh's officers who
were with him in custody in his master's house, saying, ``Why do you
look so sad today?'' \bibleverse{8} They said to him, ``We have dreamt a
dream, and there is no one who can interpret it.'' Joseph said to them,
``Don't interpretations belong to God? Please tell it to me.''

\hypertarget{the-cupbearers-dream-and-its-interpretation}{%
\subsection{The cupbearer's dream and its
interpretation}\label{the-cupbearers-dream-and-its-interpretation}}

\bibleverse{9} The chief cup bearer told his dream to Joseph, and said
to him, ``In my dream, behold, a vine was in front of me,
\bibleverse{10} and in the vine were three branches. It was as though it
budded, it blossomed, and its clusters produced ripe grapes.
\bibleverse{11} Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I took the grapes, and
pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's
hand.'' \bibleverse{12} Joseph said to him, ``This is its
interpretation: the three branches are three days. \bibleverse{13}
Within three more days, Pharaoh will lift up your head, and restore you
to your office. You will give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, the way you
did when you were his cup bearer. \bibleverse{14} But remember me when
it is well with you. Please show kindness to me, and make mention of me
to Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. \bibleverse{15} For indeed,
I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here also I have
done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.''

\hypertarget{the-bakers-dream-and-its-interpretation}{%
\subsection{The baker's dream and its
interpretation}\label{the-bakers-dream-and-its-interpretation}}

\bibleverse{16} When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was
good, he said to Joseph, ``I also was in my dream, and behold, three
baskets of white bread were on my head. \bibleverse{17} In the uppermost
basket there were all kinds of baked food for Pharaoh, and the birds ate
them out of the basket on my head.'' \bibleverse{18} Joseph answered,
``This is its interpretation. The three baskets are three days.
\bibleverse{19} Within three more days, Pharaoh will lift up your head
from off you, and will hang you on a tree; and the birds will eat your
flesh from off you.''

\hypertarget{the-fulfillment-of-both-dreams}{%
\subsection{The fulfillment of both
dreams}\label{the-fulfillment-of-both-dreams}}

\bibleverse{20} On the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, he made
a feast for all his servants, and he lifted up the head of the chief cup
bearer and the head of the chief baker amongst his servants.
\bibleverse{21} He restored the chief cup bearer to his position again,
and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand; \bibleverse{22} but he hanged
the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them. \bibleverse{23} Yet
the chief cup bearer didn't remember Joseph, but forgot him.

\hypertarget{the-two-dreams-of-the-pharaoh-are-insoluble-for-the-egyptian-interpreters}{%
\subsection{The two dreams of the pharaoh are insoluble for the Egyptian
interpreters}\label{the-two-dreams-of-the-pharaoh-are-insoluble-for-the-egyptian-interpreters}}

\hypertarget{section-40}{%
\section{41}\label{section-40}}

\bibleverse{1} At the end of two full years, Pharaoh dreamt, and behold,
he stood by the river. \bibleverse{2} Behold, seven cattle came up out
of the river. They were sleek and fat, and they fed in the marsh grass.
\bibleverse{3} Behold, seven other cattle came up after them out of the
river, ugly and thin, and stood by the other cattle on the brink of the
river. \bibleverse{4} The ugly and thin cattle ate up the seven sleek
and fat cattle. So Pharaoh awoke. \bibleverse{5} He slept and dreamt a
second time; and behold, seven heads of grain came up on one stalk,
healthy and good. \bibleverse{6} Behold, seven heads of grain, thin and
blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them. \bibleverse{7} The
thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven healthy and full ears.
Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream. \bibleverse{8} In the
morning, his spirit was troubled, and he sent and called for all of
Egypt's magicians and wise men. Pharaoh told them his dreams, but there
was no one who could interpret them to Pharaoh.

\hypertarget{the-cupbearer-arranges-for-joseph-to-be-picked-up}{%
\subsection{The cupbearer arranges for Joseph to be picked
up}\label{the-cupbearer-arranges-for-joseph-to-be-picked-up}}

\bibleverse{9} Then the chief cup bearer spoke to Pharaoh, saying, ``I
remember my faults today. \bibleverse{10} Pharaoh was angry with his
servants, and put me in custody in the house of the captain of the
guard, with the chief baker. \bibleverse{11} We dreamt a dream in one
night, he and I. Each man dreamt according to the interpretation of his
dream. \bibleverse{12} There was with us there a young man, a Hebrew,
servant to the captain of the guard, and we told him, and he interpreted
to us our dreams. He interpreted to each man according to his dream.
\bibleverse{13} As he interpreted to us, so it was. He restored me to my
office, and he hanged him.'' \bibleverse{14} Then Pharaoh sent and
called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon. He
shaved himself, changed his clothing, and came in to Pharaoh.

\hypertarget{joseph-interprets-pharaohs-dreams}{%
\subsection{Joseph interprets Pharaoh's
dreams}\label{joseph-interprets-pharaohs-dreams}}

\bibleverse{15} Pharaoh said to Joseph, ``I have dreamt a dream, and
there is no one who can interpret it. I have heard it said of you, that
when you hear a dream you can interpret it.'' \bibleverse{16} Joseph
answered Pharaoh, saying, ``It isn't in me. God will give Pharaoh an
answer of peace.'' \bibleverse{17} Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, ``In my
dream, behold, I stood on the brink of the river; \bibleverse{18} and
behold, seven fat and sleek cattle came up out of the river. They fed in
the marsh grass; \bibleverse{19} and behold, seven other cattle came up
after them, poor and very ugly and thin, such as I never saw in all the
land of Egypt for ugliness. \bibleverse{20} The thin and ugly cattle ate
up the first seven fat cattle; \bibleverse{21} and when they had eaten
them up, it couldn't be known that they had eaten them, but they were
still ugly, as at the beginning. So I awoke. \bibleverse{22} I saw in my
dream, and behold, seven heads of grain came up on one stalk, full and
good; \bibleverse{23} and behold, seven heads of grain, withered, thin,
and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them. \bibleverse{24}
The thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven good heads of grain. I
told it to the magicians, but there was no one who could explain it to
me.'' \bibleverse{25} Joseph said to Pharaoh, ``The dream of Pharaoh is
one. What God is about to do he has declared to Pharaoh. \bibleverse{26}
The seven good cattle are seven years; and the seven good heads of grain
are seven years. The dream is one. \bibleverse{27} The seven thin and
ugly cattle that came up after them are seven years, and also the seven
empty heads of grain blasted with the east wind; they will be seven
years of famine. \bibleverse{28} That is the thing which I have spoken
to Pharaoh. God has shown Pharaoh what he is about to do.
\bibleverse{29} Behold, seven years of great plenty throughout all the
land of Egypt are coming. \bibleverse{30} Seven years of famine will
arise after them, and all the plenty will be forgotten in the land of
Egypt. The famine will consume the land, \bibleverse{31} and the plenty
will not be known in the land by reason of that famine which follows;
for it will be very grievous. \bibleverse{32} The dream was doubled to
Pharaoh, because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly
bring it to pass.

\hypertarget{josephs-advice-for-pharaoh}{%
\subsection{Joseph's advice for
Pharaoh}\label{josephs-advice-for-pharaoh}}

\bibleverse{33} ``Now therefore let Pharaoh look for a discreet and wise
man, and set him over the land of Egypt. \bibleverse{34} Let Pharaoh do
this, and let him appoint overseers over the land, and take up the fifth
part of the land of Egypt's produce in the seven plenteous years.
\bibleverse{35} Let them gather all the food of these good years that
come, and store grain under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities,
and let them keep it. \bibleverse{36} The food will be to supply the
land against the seven years of famine, which will be in the land of
Egypt; so that the land will not perish through the famine.''

\hypertarget{joseph-was-promoted-to-the-highest-official-in-the-state}{%
\subsection{Joseph was promoted to the highest official in the
state}\label{joseph-was-promoted-to-the-highest-official-in-the-state}}

\bibleverse{37} The thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the
eyes of all his servants. \bibleverse{38} Pharaoh said to his servants,
``Can we find such a one as this, a man in whom is the Spirit of God?''
\bibleverse{39} Pharaoh said to Joseph, ``Because God has shown you all
of this, there is no one so discreet and wise as you. \bibleverse{40}
You shall be over my house. All my people will be ruled according to
your word. Only in the throne I will be greater than you.''
\bibleverse{41} Pharaoh said to Joseph, ``Behold, I have set you over
all the land of Egypt.'' \bibleverse{42} Pharaoh took off his signet
ring from his hand, and put it on Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in
robes of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck.
\bibleverse{43} He made him ride in the second chariot which he had.
They cried before him, ``Bow the knee!'' He set him over all the land of
Egypt. \bibleverse{44} Pharaoh said to Joseph, ``I am Pharaoh. Without
you, no man shall lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of
Egypt.'' \bibleverse{45} Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphenath-Paneah.
He gave him Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On as a wife.
Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.

\hypertarget{measurements-of-josuxe9-during-the-seven-fertile-years-the-birth-of-their-two-children}{%
\subsection{Measurements of José during the seven fertile years; the
birth of their two
children}\label{measurements-of-josuxe9-during-the-seven-fertile-years-the-birth-of-their-two-children}}

\bibleverse{46} Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh
king of Egypt. Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went
throughout all the land of Egypt. \bibleverse{47} In the seven plenteous
years the earth produced abundantly. \bibleverse{48} He gathered up all
the food of the seven years which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up
the food in the cities. He stored food in each city from the fields
around that city. \bibleverse{49} Joseph laid up grain as the sand of
the sea, very much, until he stopped counting, for it was without
number. \bibleverse{50} To Joseph were born two sons before the year of
famine came, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On, bore
to him. \bibleverse{51} Joseph called the name of the firstborn
Manasseh,\footnote{\textbf{41:51} ``Manasseh'' sounds like the Hebrew
  for ``forget''.} ``For'', he said, ``God has made me forget all my
toil, and all my father's house.'' \bibleverse{52} The name of the
second, he called Ephraim:\footnote{\textbf{41:52} ``Ephraim'' sounds
  like the Hebrew for ``twice fruitful''.} ``For God has made me
fruitful in the land of my affliction.''

\hypertarget{the-seven-barren-years-and-josephs-grain-sales-during-the-famine}{%
\subsection{The seven barren years and Joseph's grain sales during the
famine}\label{the-seven-barren-years-and-josephs-grain-sales-during-the-famine}}

\bibleverse{53} The seven years of plenty, that were in the land of
Egypt, came to an end. \bibleverse{54} The seven years of famine began
to come, just as Joseph had said. There was famine in all lands, but in
all the land of Egypt there was bread. \bibleverse{55} When all the land
of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread, and
Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, ``Go to Joseph. What he says to you,
do.'' \bibleverse{56} The famine was over all the surface of the earth.
Joseph opened all the store houses, and sold to the Egyptians. The
famine was severe in the land of Egypt. \bibleverse{57} All countries
came into Egypt, to Joseph, to buy grain, because the famine was severe
in all the earth.

\hypertarget{jacobs-ten-eldest-sons-move-to-egypt-to-buy-grain}{%
\subsection{Jacob's ten eldest sons move to Egypt to buy
grain}\label{jacobs-ten-eldest-sons-move-to-egypt-to-buy-grain}}

\hypertarget{section-41}{%
\section{42}\label{section-41}}

\bibleverse{1} Now Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt, and Jacob
said to his sons, ``Why do you look at one another?'' \bibleverse{2} He
said, ``Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down
there, and buy for us from there, so that we may live, and not die.''
\bibleverse{3} Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
\bibleverse{4} But Jacob didn't send Benjamin, Joseph's brother, with
his brothers; for he said, ``Lest perhaps harm happen to him.''
\bibleverse{5} The sons of Israel came to buy amongst those who came,
for the famine was in the land of Canaan.

\hypertarget{joses-first-tough-conversation-with-his-brothers}{%
\subsection{Jose's first tough conversation with his
brothers}\label{joses-first-tough-conversation-with-his-brothers}}

\bibleverse{6} Joseph was the governor over the land. It was he who sold
to all the people of the land. Joseph's brothers came, and bowed
themselves down to him with their faces to the earth. \bibleverse{7}
Joseph saw his brothers, and he recognised them, but acted like a
stranger to them, and spoke roughly with them. He said to them, ``Where
did you come from?'' They said, ``From the land of Canaan, to buy
food.'' \bibleverse{8} Joseph recognised his brothers, but they didn't
recognise him. \bibleverse{9} Joseph remembered the dreams which he
dreamt about them, and said to them, ``You are spies! You have come to
see the nakedness of the land.'' \bibleverse{10} They said to him, ``No,
my lord, but your servants have come to buy food. \bibleverse{11} We are
all one man's sons; we are honest men. Your servants are not spies.''
\bibleverse{12} He said to them, ``No, but you have come to see the
nakedness of the land!'' \bibleverse{13} They said, ``We, your servants,
are twelve brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and
behold, the youngest is today with our father, and one is no more.''
\bibleverse{14} Joseph said to them, ``It is like I told you, saying,
`You are spies!' \bibleverse{15} By this you shall be tested. By the
life of Pharaoh, you shall not go out from here, unless your youngest
brother comes here. \bibleverse{16} Send one of you, and let him get
your brother, and you shall be bound, that your words may be tested,
whether there is truth in you, or else by the life of Pharaoh surely you
are spies.'' \bibleverse{17} He put them all together into custody for
three days.

\hypertarget{the-second-conversation-simeon-as-a-hostage}{%
\subsection{The second conversation: Simeon as a
hostage}\label{the-second-conversation-simeon-as-a-hostage}}

\bibleverse{18} Joseph said to them the third day, ``Do this, and live,
for I fear God. \bibleverse{19} If you are honest men, then let one of
your brothers be bound in your prison; but you go, carry grain for the
famine of your houses. \bibleverse{20} Bring your youngest brother to
me; so will your words be verified, and you won't die.'' They did so.
\bibleverse{21} They said to one another, ``We are certainly guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the distress of his soul, when he
begged us, and we wouldn't listen. Therefore this distress has come upon
us.'' \bibleverse{22} Reuben answered them, saying, ``Didn't I tell you,
saying, `Don't sin against the child,' and you wouldn't listen?
Therefore also, behold, his blood is required.'' \bibleverse{23} They
didn't know that Joseph understood them; for there was an interpreter
between them. \bibleverse{24} He turned himself away from them, and
wept. Then he returned to them, and spoke to them, and took Simeon from
amongst them, and bound him before their eyes.

\hypertarget{return-of-the-brothers-to-canaan}{%
\subsection{Return of the brothers to
Canaan}\label{return-of-the-brothers-to-canaan}}

\bibleverse{25} Then Joseph gave a command to fill their bags with
grain, and to restore each man's money into his sack, and to give them
food for the way. So it was done to them. \bibleverse{26} They loaded
their donkeys with their grain, and departed from there. \bibleverse{27}
As one of them opened his sack to give his donkey food in the lodging
place, he saw his money. Behold, it was in the mouth of his sack.
\bibleverse{28} He said to his brothers, ``My money is restored! Behold,
it is in my sack!'' Their hearts failed them, and they turned trembling
to one another, saying, ``What is this that God has done to us?''
\bibleverse{29} They came to Jacob their father, to the land of Canaan,
and told him all that had happened to them, saying, \bibleverse{30}
``The man, the lord of the land, spoke roughly with us, and took us for
spies of the country. \bibleverse{31} We said to him, `We are honest
men. We are no spies. \bibleverse{32} We are twelve brothers, sons of
our father; one is no more, and the youngest is today with our father in
the land of Canaan.' \bibleverse{33} The man, the lord of the land, said
to us, `By this I will know that you are honest men: leave one of your
brothers with me, and take grain for the famine of your houses, and go
your way. \bibleverse{34} Bring your youngest brother to me. Then I will
know that you are not spies, but that you are honest men. So I will
deliver your brother to you, and you shall trade in the land.'\,''
\bibleverse{35} As they emptied their sacks, behold, each man's bundle
of money was in his sack. When they and their father saw their bundles
of money, they were afraid. \bibleverse{36} Jacob, their father, said to
them, ``You have bereaved me of my children! Joseph is no more, Simeon
is no more, and you want to take Benjamin away. All these things are
against me.'' \bibleverse{37} Reuben spoke to his father, saying, ``Kill
my two sons, if I don't bring him to you. Entrust him to my care, and I
will bring him to you again.'' \bibleverse{38} He said, ``My son shall
not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he only is left. If
harm happens to him along the way in which you go, then you will bring
down my grey hairs with sorrow to Sheol.''\footnote{\textbf{42:38} Sheol
  is the place of the dead.}

\hypertarget{second-journey-of-josephs-brothers-to-egypt-with-benjamin}{%
\subsection{Second journey of Joseph's brothers to Egypt with
Benjamin}\label{second-journey-of-josephs-brothers-to-egypt-with-benjamin}}

\hypertarget{section-42}{%
\section{43}\label{section-42}}

\bibleverse{1} The famine was severe in the land. \bibleverse{2} When
they had eaten up the grain which they had brought out of Egypt, their
father said to them, ``Go again, buy us a little more food.''
\bibleverse{3} Judah spoke to him, saying, ``The man solemnly warned us,
saying, `You shall not see my face, unless your brother is with you.'
\bibleverse{4} If you'll send our brother with us, we'll go down and buy
you food; \bibleverse{5} but if you don't send him, we won't go down,
for the man said to us, `You shall not see my face, unless your brother
is with you.'\,'' \bibleverse{6} Israel said, ``Why did you treat me so
badly, telling the man that you had another brother?'' \bibleverse{7}
They said, ``The man asked directly concerning ourselves, and concerning
our relatives, saying, `Is your father still alive? Have you another
brother?' We just answered his questions. Is there any way we could know
that he would say, `Bring your brother down?'\,'' \bibleverse{8} Judah
said to Israel, his father, ``Send the boy with me, and we'll get up and
go, so that we may live, and not die, both we, and you, and also our
little ones. \bibleverse{9} I'll be collateral for him. From my hand
will you require him. If I don't bring him to you, and set him before
you, then let me bear the blame forever; \bibleverse{10} for if we
hadn't delayed, surely we would have returned a second time by now.''
\bibleverse{11} Their father, Israel, said to them, ``If it must be so,
then do this: Take from the choice fruits of the land in your bags, and
carry down a present for the man, a little balm, a little honey, spices
and myrrh, nuts, and almonds; \bibleverse{12} and take double money in
your hand, and take back the money that was returned in the mouth of
your sacks. Perhaps it was an oversight. \bibleverse{13} Take your
brother also, get up, and return to the man. \bibleverse{14} May God
Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may release to you your
other brother and Benjamin. If I am bereaved of my children, I am
bereaved.'' \bibleverse{15} The men took that present, and they took
double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and got up, went down to
Egypt, and stood before Joseph.

\hypertarget{friendly-welcome-by-josuxe9-from-his-brothers}{%
\subsection{Friendly welcome by José from his
brothers}\label{friendly-welcome-by-josuxe9-from-his-brothers}}

\bibleverse{16} When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the
steward of his house, ``Bring the men into the house, and butcher an
animal, and prepare; for the men will dine with me at noon.''
\bibleverse{17} The man did as Joseph commanded, and the man brought the
men to Joseph's house. \bibleverse{18} The men were afraid, because they
were brought to Joseph's house; and they said, ``Because of the money
that was returned in our sacks the first time, we're brought in; that he
may seek occasion against us, attack us, and seize us as slaves, along
with our donkeys.'' \bibleverse{19} They came near to the steward of
Joseph's house, and they spoke to him at the door of the house,
\bibleverse{20} and said, ``Oh, my lord, we indeed came down the first
time to buy food. \bibleverse{21} When we came to the lodging place, we
opened our sacks, and behold, each man's money was in the mouth of his
sack, our money in full weight. We have brought it back in our hand.
\bibleverse{22} We have brought down other money in our hand to buy
food. We don't know who put our money in our sacks.'' \bibleverse{23} He
said, ``Peace be to you. Don't be afraid. Your God, and the God of your
father, has given you treasure in your sacks. I received your money.''
He brought Simeon out to them. \bibleverse{24} The man brought the men
into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet. He
gave their donkeys fodder. \bibleverse{25} They prepared the present for
Joseph's coming at noon, for they heard that they should eat bread
there.

\hypertarget{josuxe9-receives-and-entertains-his-brothers-in-the-most-friendly-way}{%
\subsection{José receives and entertains his brothers in the most
friendly
way}\label{josuxe9-receives-and-entertains-his-brothers-in-the-most-friendly-way}}

\bibleverse{26} When Joseph came home, they brought him the present
which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves down to the
earth before him. \bibleverse{27} He asked them of their welfare, and
said, ``Is your father well, the old man of whom you spoke? Is he yet
alive?'' \bibleverse{28} They said, ``Your servant, our father, is well.
He is still alive.'' They bowed down humbly. \bibleverse{29} He lifted
up his eyes, and saw Benjamin, his brother, his mother's son, and said,
``Is this your youngest brother, of whom you spoke to me?'' He said,
``God be gracious to you, my son.'' \bibleverse{30} Joseph hurried, for
his heart yearned over his brother; and he sought a place to weep. He
entered into his room, and wept there. \bibleverse{31} He washed his
face, and came out. He controlled himself, and said, ``Serve the meal.''
\bibleverse{32} They served him by himself, and them by themselves, and
the Egyptians who ate with him by themselves, because the Egyptians
don't eat with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination to the Egyptians.
\bibleverse{33} They sat before him, the firstborn according to his
birthright, and the youngest according to his youth, and the men
marvelled with one another. \bibleverse{34} He sent portions to them
from before him, but Benjamin's portion was five times as much as any of
theirs. They drank, and were merry with him.

\hypertarget{josuxe9-is-testing-his-brothers-one-last-time}{%
\subsection{José is testing his brothers one last
time}\label{josuxe9-is-testing-his-brothers-one-last-time}}

\hypertarget{section-43}{%
\section{44}\label{section-43}}

\bibleverse{1} He commanded the steward of his house, saying, ``Fill the
men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put each man's
money in his sack's mouth. \bibleverse{2} Put my cup, the silver cup, in
the sack's mouth of the youngest, with his grain money.'' He did
according to the word that Joseph had spoken. \bibleverse{3} As soon as
the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their donkeys.
\bibleverse{4} When they had gone out of the city, and were not yet far
off, Joseph said to his steward, ``Up, follow after the men. When you
overtake them, ask them, `Why have you rewarded evil for good?
\bibleverse{5} Isn't this that from which my lord drinks, and by which
he indeed divines? You have done evil in so doing.'\,'' \bibleverse{6}
He overtook them, and he spoke these words to them. \bibleverse{7} They
said to him, ``Why does my lord speak such words as these? Far be it
from your servants that they should do such a thing! \bibleverse{8}
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again
to you out of the land of Canaan. How then should we steal silver or
gold out of your lord's house? \bibleverse{9} With whomever of your
servants it is found, let him die, and we also will be my lord's
slaves.'' \bibleverse{10} He said, ``Now also let it be according to
your words. He with whom it is found will be my slave; and you will be
blameless.'' \bibleverse{11} Then they hurried, and each man took his
sack down to the ground, and each man opened his sack. \bibleverse{12}
He searched, beginning with the oldest, and ending at the youngest. The
cup was found in Benjamin's sack. \bibleverse{13} Then they tore their
clothes, and each man loaded his donkey, and returned to the city.

\hypertarget{the-brothers-return-to-the-city-and-humble-themselves-before-joseph}{%
\subsection{The brothers return to the city and humble themselves before
Joseph}\label{the-brothers-return-to-the-city-and-humble-themselves-before-joseph}}

\bibleverse{14} Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house, and he
was still there. They fell on the ground before him. \bibleverse{15}
Joseph said to them, ``What deed is this that you have done? Don't you
know that such a man as I can indeed do divination?'' \bibleverse{16}
Judah said, ``What will we tell my lord? What will we speak? How will we
clear ourselves? God has found out the iniquity of your servants.
Behold, we are my lord's slaves, both we and he also in whose hand the
cup is found.'' \bibleverse{17} He said, ``Far be it from me that I
should do so. The man in whose hand the cup is found, he will be my
slave; but as for you, go up in peace to your father.'' \bibleverse{18}
Then Judah came near to him, and said, ``Oh, my lord, please let your
servant speak a word in my lord's ears, and don't let your anger burn
against your servant; for you are even as Pharaoh. \bibleverse{19} My
lord asked his servants, saying, `Have you a father, or a brother?'
\bibleverse{20} We said to my lord, `We have a father, an old man, and a
child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he
alone is left of his mother; and his father loves him.' \bibleverse{21}
You said to your servants, `Bring him down to me, that I may set my eyes
on him.' \bibleverse{22} We said to my lord, `The boy can't leave his
father, for if he should leave his father, his father would die.'
\bibleverse{23} You said to your servants, `Unless your youngest brother
comes down with you, you will see my face no more.' \bibleverse{24} When
we came up to your servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
\bibleverse{25} Our father said, `Go again and buy us a little food.'
\bibleverse{26} We said, `We can't go down. If our youngest brother is
with us, then we will go down: for we may not see the man's face, unless
our youngest brother is with us.' \bibleverse{27} Your servant, my
father, said to us, `You know that my wife bore me two sons.
\bibleverse{28} One went out from me, and I said, ``Surely he is torn in
pieces;'' and I haven't seen him since. \bibleverse{29} If you take this
one also from me, and harm happens to him, you will bring down my grey
hairs with sorrow to Sheol.'\footnote{\textbf{44:29} Sheol is the place
  of the dead.} \bibleverse{30} Now therefore when I come to your
servant my father, and the boy is not with us; since his life is bound
up in the boy's life; \bibleverse{31} it will happen, when he sees that
the boy is no more, that he will die. Your servants will bring down the
grey hairs of your servant, our father, with sorrow to Sheol.\footnote{\textbf{44:31}
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} \bibleverse{32} For your servant
became collateral for the boy to my father, saying, `If I don't bring
him to you, then I will bear the blame to my father forever.'
\bibleverse{33} Now therefore, please let your servant stay instead of
the boy, my lord's slave; and let the boy go up with his brothers.
\bibleverse{34} For how will I go up to my father, if the boy isn't with
me?---lest I see the evil that will come on my father.''

\hypertarget{section-44}{%
\section{45}\label{section-44}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Joseph couldn't control himself before all those who
stood before him, and he called out, ``Cause everyone to go out from
me!'' No one else stood with him, while Joseph made himself known to his
brothers. \bibleverse{2} He wept aloud. The Egyptians heard, and the
house of Pharaoh heard. \bibleverse{3} Joseph said to his brothers, ``I
am Joseph! Does my father still live?'' His brothers couldn't answer
him; for they were terrified at his presence. \bibleverse{4} Joseph said
to his brothers, ``Come near to me, please.'' They came near. He said,
``I am Joseph, your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. \bibleverse{5}
Now don't be grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that you sold me here,
for God sent me before you to preserve life. \bibleverse{6} For these
two years the famine has been in the land, and there are yet five years,
in which there will be no ploughing and no harvest. \bibleverse{7} God
sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant in the earth, and to
save you alive by a great deliverance. \bibleverse{8} So now it wasn't
you who sent me here, but God, and he has made me a father to Pharaoh,
lord of all his house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
\bibleverse{9} Hurry, and go up to my father, and tell him, `This is
what your son Joseph says, ``God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come
down to me. Don't wait. \bibleverse{10} You shall dwell in the land of
Goshen, and you will be near to me, you, your children, your children's
children, your flocks, your herds, and all that you have.
\bibleverse{11} There I will provide for you; for there are yet five
years of famine; lest you come to poverty, you, and your household, and
all that you have.''\,' \bibleverse{12} Behold, your eyes see, and the
eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
\bibleverse{13} You shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and
of all that you have seen. You shall hurry and bring my father down
here.'' \bibleverse{14} He fell on his brother Benjamin's neck and wept,
and Benjamin wept on his neck. \bibleverse{15} He kissed all his
brothers, and wept on them. After that his brothers talked with him.
\bibleverse{16} The report of it was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying,
``Joseph's brothers have come.'' It pleased Pharaoh well, and his
servants. \bibleverse{17} Pharaoh said to Joseph, ``Tell your brothers,
`Do this: Load your animals, and go, travel to the land of Canaan.
\bibleverse{18} Take your father and your households, and come to me,
and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and you will eat the
fat of the land.' \bibleverse{19} Now you are commanded to do this: Take
wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your
wives, and bring your father, and come. \bibleverse{20} Also, don't
concern yourselves about your belongings, for the good of all the land
of Egypt is yours.'' \bibleverse{21} The sons of Israel did so. Joseph
gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them
provision for the way. \bibleverse{22} He gave each one of them changes
of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver and
five changes of clothing. \bibleverse{23} He sent the following to his
father: ten donkeys loaded with the good things of Egypt, and ten female
donkeys loaded with grain and bread and provision for his father by the
way. \bibleverse{24} So he sent his brothers away, and they departed. He
said to them, ``See that you don't quarrel on the way.'' \bibleverse{25}
They went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan, to Jacob
their father. \bibleverse{26} They told him, saying, ``Joseph is still
alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt.'' His heart fainted,
for he didn't believe them. \bibleverse{27} They told him all the words
of Joseph, which he had said to them. When he saw the wagons which
Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob, their father,
revived. \bibleverse{28} Israel said, ``It is enough. Joseph my son is
still alive. I will go and see him before I die.''

\hypertarget{god-approves-of-jacobs-move-to-beersheba-in-a-revelation}{%
\subsection{God approves of Jacob's move to Beersheba in a
revelation}\label{god-approves-of-jacobs-move-to-beersheba-in-a-revelation}}

\hypertarget{section-45}{%
\section{46}\label{section-45}}

\bibleverse{1} Israel travelled with all that he had, and came to
Beersheba, and offered sacrifices to the God of his father, Isaac.
\bibleverse{2} God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night, and
said, ``Jacob, Jacob!'' He said, ``Here I am.'' \bibleverse{3} He said,
``I am God, the God of your father. Don't be afraid to go down into
Egypt, for there I will make of you a great nation. \bibleverse{4} I
will go down with you into Egypt. I will also surely bring you up again.
Joseph's hand will close your eyes.'' \bibleverse{5} Jacob rose up from
Beersheba, and the sons of Israel carried Jacob, their father, their
little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to
carry him. \bibleverse{6} They took their livestock, and their goods,
which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into
Egypt---Jacob, and all his offspring with him, \bibleverse{7} his sons,
and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and
he brought all his offspring with him into Egypt.

\hypertarget{the-lineage-of-the-entire-family-of-jacob}{%
\subsection{The lineage of the entire family of
Jacob}\label{the-lineage-of-the-entire-family-of-jacob}}

\bibleverse{8} These are the names of the children of Israel, who came
into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
\bibleverse{9} The sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
\bibleverse{10} The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar,
and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman. \bibleverse{11} The sons of
Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. \bibleverse{12} The sons of Judah:
Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah; but Er and Onan died in the land of
Canaan. The sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul. \bibleverse{13} The
sons of Issachar: Tola, Puvah, Iob, and Shimron. \bibleverse{14} The
sons of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel. \bibleverse{15} These are the
sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan Aram, with his daughter
Dinah. All the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty-three.
\bibleverse{16} The sons of Gad: Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri,
Arodi, and Areli. \bibleverse{17} The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah,
Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah their sister. The sons of Beriah: Heber and
Malchiel. \bibleverse{18} These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave
to Leah, his daughter, and these she bore to Jacob, even sixteen souls.
\bibleverse{19} The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.
\bibleverse{20} To Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and
Ephraim, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bore to
him. \bibleverse{21} The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera,
Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard. \bibleverse{22} These are
the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.
\bibleverse{23} The son of Dan: Hushim. \bibleverse{24} The sons of
Naphtali: Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem. \bibleverse{25} These are
the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel, his daughter, and these
she bore to Jacob: all the souls were seven. \bibleverse{26} All the
souls who came with Jacob into Egypt, who were his direct offspring, in
addition to Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were sixty-six.
\bibleverse{27} The sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were
two souls. All the souls of the house of Jacob, who came into Egypt,
were seventy.

\hypertarget{josuxe9-greets-his-father-in-gosen}{%
\subsection{José greets his father in
Gosen}\label{josuxe9-greets-his-father-in-gosen}}

\bibleverse{28} Jacob sent Judah before him to Joseph, to show the way
before him to Goshen, and they came into the land of Goshen.
\bibleverse{29} Joseph prepared his chariot, and went up to meet Israel,
his father, in Goshen. He presented himself to him, and fell on his
neck, and wept on his neck a good while. \bibleverse{30} Israel said to
Joseph, ``Now let me die, since I have seen your face, that you are
still alive.'' \bibleverse{31} Joseph said to his brothers, and to his
father's house, ``I will go up, and speak with Pharaoh, and will tell
him, `My brothers, and my father's house, who were in the land of
Canaan, have come to me. \bibleverse{32} These men are shepherds, for
they have been keepers of livestock, and they have brought their flocks,
and their herds, and all that they have.' \bibleverse{33} It will
happen, when Pharaoh summons you, and will say, `What is your
occupation?' \bibleverse{34} that you shall say, `Your servants have
been keepers of livestock from our youth even until now, both we, and
our fathers:' that you may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every
shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians.''

\hypertarget{pharaoh-promises-the-sons-of-jacob-to-settle-in-goshen}{%
\subsection{Pharaoh promises the sons of Jacob to settle in
Goshen}\label{pharaoh-promises-the-sons-of-jacob-to-settle-in-goshen}}

\hypertarget{section-46}{%
\section{47}\label{section-46}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, and said, ``My
father and my brothers, with their flocks, their herds, and all that
they own, have come out of the land of Canaan; and behold, they are in
the land of Goshen.'' \bibleverse{2} From amongst his brothers he took
five men, and presented them to Pharaoh. \bibleverse{3} Pharaoh said to
his brothers, ``What is your occupation?'' They said to Pharaoh, ``Your
servants are shepherds, both we, and our fathers.'' \bibleverse{4} They
also said to Pharaoh, ``We have come to live as foreigners in the land,
for there is no pasture for your servants' flocks. For the famine is
severe in the land of Canaan. Now therefore, please let your servants
dwell in the land of Goshen.'' \bibleverse{5} Pharaoh spoke to Joseph,
saying, ``Your father and your brothers have come to you. \bibleverse{6}
The land of Egypt is before you. Make your father and your brothers
dwell in the best of the land. Let them dwell in the land of Goshen. If
you know any able men amongst them, then put them in charge of my
livestock.''

\hypertarget{jacob-presented-himself-to-pharaoh-and-then-settled-in-gosen}{%
\subsection{Jacob presented himself to Pharaoh and then settled in
Gosen}\label{jacob-presented-himself-to-pharaoh-and-then-settled-in-gosen}}

\bibleverse{7} Joseph brought in Jacob, his father, and set him before
Pharaoh; and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. \bibleverse{8} Pharaoh said to
Jacob, ``How old are you?'' \bibleverse{9} Jacob said to Pharaoh, ``The
years of my pilgrimage are one hundred and thirty years. The days of the
years of my life have been few and evil. They have not attained to the
days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their
pilgrimage.'' \bibleverse{10} Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from
the presence of Pharaoh. \bibleverse{11} Joseph placed his father and
his brothers, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the
best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
\bibleverse{12} Joseph provided his father, his brothers, and all of his
father's household with bread, according to the sizes of their families.

\hypertarget{joseph-buys-the-land-for-pharaoh}{%
\subsection{Joseph buys the land for
Pharaoh}\label{joseph-buys-the-land-for-pharaoh}}

\bibleverse{13} There was no bread in all the land; for the famine was
very severe, so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan fainted by
reason of the famine. \bibleverse{14} Joseph gathered up all the money
that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the
grain which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's
house. \bibleverse{15} When the money was all spent in the land of
Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph, and
said, ``Give us bread, for why should we die in your presence? For our
money fails.'' \bibleverse{16} Joseph said, ``Give me your livestock;
and I will give you food for your livestock, if your money is gone.''
\bibleverse{17} They brought their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph gave
them bread in exchange for the horses, and for the flocks, and for the
herds, and for the donkeys: and he fed them with bread in exchange for
all their livestock for that year. \bibleverse{18} When that year was
ended, they came to him the second year, and said to him, ``We will not
hide from my lord how our money is all spent, and the herds of livestock
are my lord's. There is nothing left in the sight of my lord, but our
bodies, and our lands. \bibleverse{19} Why should we die before your
eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and we and
our land will be servants to Pharaoh. Give us seed, that we may live,
and not die, and that the land won't be desolate.'' \bibleverse{20} So
Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh, for every man of the
Egyptians sold his field, because the famine was severe on them, and the
land became Pharaoh's. \bibleverse{21} As for the people, he moved them
to the cities from one end of the border of Egypt even to the other end
of it. \bibleverse{22} Only he didn't buy the land of the priests, for
the priests had a portion from Pharaoh, and ate their portion which
Pharaoh gave them. That is why they didn't sell their land.
\bibleverse{23} Then Joseph said to the people, ``Behold, I have bought
you and your land today for Pharaoh. Behold, here is seed for you, and
you shall sow the land. \bibleverse{24} It will happen at the harvests,
that you shall give a fifth to Pharaoh, and four parts will be your own,
for seed of the field, for your food, for them of your households, and
for food for your little ones.'' \bibleverse{25} They said, ``You have
saved our lives! Let us find favour in the sight of my lord, and we will
be Pharaoh's servants.'' \bibleverse{26} Joseph made it a statute
concerning the land of Egypt to this day, that Pharaoh should have the
fifth. Only the land of the priests alone didn't become Pharaoh's.

\hypertarget{happy-situation-for-the-israelites-in-egypt-jacobs-last-wish-regarding-his-funeral}{%
\subsection{Happy situation for the Israelites in Egypt; Jacob's last
wish regarding his
funeral}\label{happy-situation-for-the-israelites-in-egypt-jacobs-last-wish-regarding-his-funeral}}

\bibleverse{27} Israel lived in the land of Egypt, in the land of
Goshen; and they got themselves possessions therein, and were fruitful,
and multiplied exceedingly. \bibleverse{28} Jacob lived in the land of
Egypt seventeen years. So the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were
one hundred and forty-seven years. \bibleverse{29} The time came near
that Israel must die, and he called his son Joseph, and said to him,
``If now I have found favour in your sight, please put your hand under
my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me. Please don't bury me in
Egypt, \bibleverse{30} but when I sleep with my fathers, you shall carry
me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place.'' Joseph said, ``I
will do as you have said.'' \bibleverse{31} Israel said, ``Swear to
me,'' and he swore to him. Then Israel bowed himself on the bed's head.

\hypertarget{jacob-takes-josephs-two-sons-instead-of-children}{%
\subsection{Jacob takes Joseph's two sons instead of
children}\label{jacob-takes-josephs-two-sons-instead-of-children}}

\hypertarget{section-47}{%
\section{48}\label{section-47}}

\bibleverse{1} After these things, someone said to Joseph, ``Behold,
your father is sick.'' He took with him his two sons, Manasseh and
Ephraim. \bibleverse{2} Someone told Jacob, and said, ``Behold, your son
Joseph comes to you,'' and Israel strengthened himself, and sat on the
bed. \bibleverse{3} Jacob said to Joseph, ``God Almighty appeared to me
at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, \bibleverse{4} and said to
me, `Behold, I will make you fruitful, and multiply you, and I will make
of you a company of peoples, and will give this land to your offspring
after you for an everlasting possession.' \bibleverse{5} Now your two
sons, who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you
into Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simeon,
will be mine. \bibleverse{6} Your offspring, whom you become the father
of after them, will be yours. They will be called after the name of
their brothers in their inheritance. \bibleverse{7} As for me, when I
came from Paddan, Rachel died beside me in the land of Canaan on the
way, when there was still some distance to come to Ephrath, and I buried
her there on the way to Ephrath (also called Bethlehem).''

\hypertarget{jacob-blesses-the-two-sons-of-joseph}{%
\subsection{Jacob blesses the two sons of
Joseph}\label{jacob-blesses-the-two-sons-of-joseph}}

\bibleverse{8} Israel saw Joseph's sons, and said, ``Who are these?''
\bibleverse{9} Joseph said to his father, ``They are my sons, whom God
has given me here.'' He said, ``Please bring them to me, and I will
bless them.'' \bibleverse{10} Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age,
so that he couldn't see well. Joseph brought them near to him; and he
kissed them, and embraced them. \bibleverse{11} Israel said to Joseph,
``I didn't think I would see your face, and behold, God has let me see
your offspring also.'' \bibleverse{12} Joseph brought them out from
between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
\bibleverse{13} Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand towards
Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand towards Israel's right
hand, and brought them near to him. \bibleverse{14} Israel stretched out
his right hand, and laid it on Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and
his left hand on Manasseh's head, guiding his hands knowingly, for
Manasseh was the firstborn. \bibleverse{15} He blessed Joseph, and said,
``The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God who
has fed me all my life long to this day, \bibleverse{16} the angel who
has redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads, and let my name be named
on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac. Let them grow
into a multitude upon the earth.'' \bibleverse{17} When Joseph saw that
his father laid his right hand on the head of Ephraim, it displeased
him. He held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head to
Manasseh's head. \bibleverse{18} Joseph said to his father, ``Not so, my
father, for this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.''
\bibleverse{19} His father refused, and said, ``I know, my son, I know.
He also will become a people, and he also will be great. However, his
younger brother will be greater than he, and his offspring will become a
multitude of nations.'' \bibleverse{20} He blessed them that day,
saying, ``Israel will bless in you, saying, `God make you as Ephraim and
as Manasseh'\,'' He set Ephraim before Manasseh. \bibleverse{21} Israel
said to Joseph, ``Behold, I am dying, but God will be with you, and
bring you again to the land of your fathers. \bibleverse{22} Moreover I
have given to you one portion above your brothers, which I took out of
the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-prophecies-about-his-sons}{%
\subsection{Jacob's prophecies about his
sons}\label{jacobs-prophecies-about-his-sons}}

\hypertarget{section-48}{%
\section{49}\label{section-48}}

\bibleverse{1} Jacob called to his sons, and said: ``Gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you that which will happen to you in the days
to come. \bibleverse{2} Assemble yourselves, and hear, you sons of
Jacob. Listen to Israel, your father. \bibleverse{3} ``Reuben, you are
my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, excelling in
dignity, and excelling in power. \bibleverse{4} Boiling over like water,
you shall not excel, because you went up to your father's bed, then
defiled it. He went up to my couch. \bibleverse{5} ``Simeon and Levi are
brothers. Their swords are weapons of violence. \bibleverse{6} My soul,
don't come into their council. My glory, don't be united to their
assembly; for in their anger they killed men. In their self-will they
hamstrung cattle. \bibleverse{7} Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob,
and scatter them in Israel. \bibleverse{8} ``Judah, your brothers will
praise you. Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies. Your father's
sons will bow down before you. \bibleverse{9} Judah is a lion's cub.
From the prey, my son, you have gone up. He stooped down, he crouched as
a lion, as a lioness. Who will rouse him up? \bibleverse{10} The sceptre
will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet,
until he comes to whom it belongs. The obedience of the peoples will be
to him. \bibleverse{11} Binding his foal to the vine, his donkey's colt
to the choice vine, he has washed his garments in wine, his robes in the
blood of grapes. \bibleverse{12} His eyes will be red with wine, his
teeth white with milk. \bibleverse{13} ``Zebulun will dwell at the haven
of the sea. He will be for a haven of ships. His border will be on
Sidon. \bibleverse{14} ``Issachar is a strong donkey, lying down between
the saddlebags. \bibleverse{15} He saw a resting place, that it was
good, the land, that it was pleasant. He bows his shoulder to the
burden, and becomes a servant doing forced labour. \bibleverse{16} ``Dan
will judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel. \bibleverse{17}
Dan will be a serpent on the trail, an adder in the path, that bites the
horse's heels, so that his rider falls backward. \bibleverse{18} I have
waited for your salvation, \textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{19} ``A troop will
press on Gad, but he will press on their heel. \bibleverse{20} ``Asher's
food will be rich. He will produce royal dainties. \bibleverse{21}
``Naphtali is a doe set free, who bears beautiful fawns. \bibleverse{22}
``Joseph is a fruitful vine, a fruitful vine by a spring. His branches
run over the wall. \bibleverse{23} The archers have severely grieved
him, shot at him, and persecuted him: \bibleverse{24} But his bow
remained strong. The arms of his hands were made strong, by the hands of
the Mighty One of Jacob, (from there is the shepherd, the stone of
Israel), \bibleverse{25} even by the God of your father, who will help
you, by the Almighty, who will bless you, with blessings of heaven
above, blessings of the deep that lies below, blessings of the breasts,
and of the womb. \bibleverse{26} The blessings of your father have
prevailed above the blessings of my ancestors, above the boundaries of
the ancient hills. They will be on the head of Joseph, on the crown of
the head of him who is separated from his brothers. \bibleverse{27}
``Benjamin is a ravenous wolf. In the morning he will devour the prey.
At evening he will divide the plunder.''

\hypertarget{jacobs-request-for-burial-in-hebron}{%
\subsection{Jacob's request for burial in
Hebron}\label{jacobs-request-for-burial-in-hebron}}

\bibleverse{28} All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is
what their father spoke to them, and blessed them. He blessed everyone
according to his own blessing. \bibleverse{29} He instructed them, and
said to them, ``I am to be gathered to my people. Bury me with my
fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
\bibleverse{30} in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is
before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field
from Ephron the Hittite as a burial place. \bibleverse{31} There they
buried Abraham and Sarah, his wife. There they buried Isaac and Rebekah,
his wife, and there I buried Leah: \bibleverse{32} the field and the
cave that is therein, which was purchased from the children of Heth.''
\bibleverse{33} When Jacob finished charging his sons, he gathered up
his feet into the bed, breathed his last breath, and was gathered to his
people.

\hypertarget{embalming-and-solemn-transfer-of-jacob-after-the-hereditary-burial-in-hebron}{%
\subsection{Embalming and solemn transfer of Jacob after the hereditary
burial in
Hebron}\label{embalming-and-solemn-transfer-of-jacob-after-the-hereditary-burial-in-hebron}}

\hypertarget{section-49}{%
\section{50}\label{section-49}}

\bibleverse{1} Joseph fell on his father's face, wept on him, and kissed
him. \bibleverse{2} Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to
embalm his father; and the physicians embalmed Israel. \bibleverse{3}
Forty days were used for him, for that is how many days it takes to
embalm. The Egyptians wept for Israel for seventy days. \bibleverse{4}
When the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph spoke to Pharaoh's
staff, saying, ``If now I have found favour in your eyes, please speak
in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, \bibleverse{5} `My father made me swear,
saying, ``Behold, I am dying. Bury me in my grave which I have dug for
myself in the land of Canaan.'' Now therefore, please let me go up and
bury my father, and I will come again.'\,'' \bibleverse{6} Pharaoh said,
``Go up, and bury your father, just like he made you swear.''
\bibleverse{7} Joseph went up to bury his father; and with him went up
all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, all the elders of
the land of Egypt, \bibleverse{8} all the house of Joseph, his brothers,
and his father's house. Only their little ones, their flocks, and their
herds, they left in the land of Goshen. \bibleverse{9} Both chariots and
horsemen went up with him. It was a very great company. \bibleverse{10}
They came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan,
and there they lamented with a very great and severe lamentation. He
mourned for his father seven days. \bibleverse{11} When the inhabitants
of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they
said, ``This is a grievous mourning by the Egyptians.'' Therefore its
name was called Abel Mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
\bibleverse{12} His sons did to him just as he commanded them,
\bibleverse{13} for his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and
buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought
with the field, as a possession for a burial site, from Ephron the
Hittite, near Mamre. \bibleverse{14} Joseph returned into Egypt---he,
and his brothers, and all that went up with him to bury his father,
after he had buried his father.

\hypertarget{josephs-generosity-towards-his-brothers}{%
\subsection{Joseph's generosity towards his
brothers}\label{josephs-generosity-towards-his-brothers}}

\bibleverse{15} When Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead,
they said, ``It may be that Joseph will hate us, and will fully pay us
back for all the evil which we did to him.'' \bibleverse{16} They sent a
message to Joseph, saying, ``Your father commanded before he died,
saying, \bibleverse{17} `You shall tell Joseph, ``Now please forgive the
disobedience of your brothers, and their sin, because they did evil to
you.''\,' Now, please forgive the disobedience of the servants of the
God of your father.'' Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
\bibleverse{18} His brothers also went and fell down before his face;
and they said, ``Behold, we are your servants.'' \bibleverse{19} Joseph
said to them, ``Don't be afraid, for am I in the place of God?
\bibleverse{20} As for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it
for good, to save many people alive, as is happening today.
\bibleverse{21} Now therefore don't be afraid. I will provide for you
and your little ones.'' He comforted them, and spoke kindly to them.

\hypertarget{josephs-old-age-and-death-his-last-wish}{%
\subsection{Joseph's old age and death; his last
wish}\label{josephs-old-age-and-death-his-last-wish}}

\bibleverse{22} Joseph lived in Egypt, he, and his father's house.
Joseph lived one hundred and ten years. \bibleverse{23} Joseph saw
Ephraim's children to the third generation. The children also of Machir,
the son of Manasseh, were born on Joseph's knees. \bibleverse{24} Joseph
said to his brothers, ``I am dying, but God will surely visit you, and
bring you up out of this land to the land which he swore to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob.'' \bibleverse{25} Joseph took an oath from the
children of Israel, saying, ``God will surely visit you, and you shall
carry up my bones from here.'' \bibleverse{26} So Joseph died, being one
hundred and ten years old, and they embalmed him, and he was put in a
coffin in Egypt.
