\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Adam, Seth, Enosh, \bibleverse{2} Kenan, Mahalalel,
Jared, \bibleverse{3} Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, \bibleverse{4} Noah,
Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

\bibleverse{5} The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal,
Meshech, and Tiras. \bibleverse{6} The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Diphath,
and Togarmah. \bibleverse{7} The sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish,
Kittim, and Rodanim.

\bibleverse{8} The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
\bibleverse{9} The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raama, Sabteca.
The sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan. \bibleverse{10} Cush became the
father of Nimrod. He began to be a mighty one in the earth.
\bibleverse{11} Mizraim became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim,
Naphtuhim, \bibleverse{12} Pathrusim, Casluhim (where the Philistines
came from), and Caphtorim. \bibleverse{13} Canaan became the father of
Sidon his firstborn, Heth, \bibleverse{14} the Jebusite, the Amorite,
the Girgashite, \bibleverse{15} the Hivite, the Arkite, the Sinite,
\bibleverse{16} the Arvadite, the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.

\bibleverse{17} The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, Aram,
Uz, Hul, Gether, and Meshech. \bibleverse{18} Arpachshad became the
father of Shelah, and Shelah became the father of Eber. \bibleverse{19}
To Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg, for in his
days the earth was divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.
\bibleverse{20} Joktan became the father of Almodad, Sheleph,
Hazarmaveth, Jerah, \bibleverse{21} Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
\bibleverse{22} Ebal, Abimael, Sheba, \bibleverse{23} Ophir, Havilah,
and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan. \bibleverse{24} Shem,
Arpachshad, Shelah, \bibleverse{25} Eber, Peleg, Reu, \bibleverse{26}
Serug, Nahor, Terah, \bibleverse{27} Abram (also called Abraham).

\bibleverse{28} The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael. \bibleverse{29}
These are their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then
Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, \bibleverse{30} Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad,
Tema, \bibleverse{31} Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of
Ishmael.

\bibleverse{32} The sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bore
Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. The sons of Jokshan:
Sheba and Dedan. \bibleverse{33} The sons of Midian: Ephah, Epher,
Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.

\bibleverse{34} Abraham became the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac:
Esau and Israel. \bibleverse{35} The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel,
Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. \bibleverse{36} The sons of Eliphaz: Teman,
Omar, Zephi, Gatam, Kenaz, Timna, and Amalek. \bibleverse{37} The sons
of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.

\bibleverse{38} The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon,
Ezer, and Dishan. \bibleverse{39} The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam; and
Timna was Lotan's sister. \bibleverse{40} The sons of Shobal: Alian,
Manahath, Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah.
\bibleverse{41} The son of Anah: Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hamran,
Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran. \bibleverse{42} The sons of Ezer: Bilhan,
Zaavan, and Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.

\bibleverse{43} Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom,
before any king reigned over the children of Israel: Bela the son of
Beor; and the name of his city was Dinhabah. \bibleverse{44} Bela died,
and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his place.
\bibleverse{45} Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites
reigned in his place. \bibleverse{46} Husham died, and Hadad the son of
Bedad, who struck Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his place; and
the name of his city was Avith. \bibleverse{47} Hadad died, and Samlah
of Masrekah reigned in his place. \bibleverse{48} Samlah died, and Shaul
of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his place. \bibleverse{49} Shaul
died, and Baal Hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his place.
\bibleverse{50} Baal Hanan died, and Hadad reigned in his place; and the
name of his city was Pai. His wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of
Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. \bibleverse{51} Then Hadad died. The
chiefs of Edom were: chief Timna, chief Aliah, chief Jetheth,
\bibleverse{52} chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
\bibleverse{53} chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar, \bibleverse{54}
chief Magdiel, and chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi,
Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, \bibleverse{2} Dan, Joseph, Benjamin,
Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

\bibleverse{3} The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, and Shelah, which three were
born to him of Shua's daughter the Canaanitess. Er, Judah's firstborn,
was wicked in the LORD's\footnote{\textbf{2:3} When rendered in ALL
  CAPITAL LETTERS, ``LORD'' or ``GOD'' is the translation of God's
  Proper Name.} sight; and he killed him. \bibleverse{4} Tamar his
daughter-in-law bore him Perez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were
five.

\bibleverse{5} The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul. \bibleverse{6} The
sons of Zerah: Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara---five of them in
all. \bibleverse{7} The son of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who
committed a trespass in the devoted thing. \bibleverse{8} The son of
Ethan: Azariah.

\bibleverse{9} The sons also of Hezron, who were born to him: Jerahmeel,
Ram, and Chelubai. \bibleverse{10} Ram became the father of Amminadab,
and Amminadab became the father of Nahshon, prince of the children of
Judah; \bibleverse{11} and Nahshon became the father of Salma, and Salma
became the father of Boaz, \bibleverse{12} and Boaz became the father of
Obed, and Obed became the father of Jesse; \bibleverse{13} and Jesse
became the father of his firstborn Eliab, Abinadab the second, Shimea
the third, \bibleverse{14} Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
\bibleverse{15} Ozem the sixth, and David the seventh; \bibleverse{16}
and their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. The sons of Zeruiah:
Abishai, Joab, and Asahel, three. \bibleverse{17} Abigail bore Amasa;
and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.

\bibleverse{18} Caleb the son of Hezron became the father of children by
Azubah his wife, and by Jerioth; and these were her sons: Jesher,
Shobab, and Ardon. \bibleverse{19} Azubah died, and Caleb married
Ephrath, who bore him Hur. \bibleverse{20} Hur became the father of Uri,
and Uri became the father of Bezalel.

\bibleverse{21} Afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the
father of Gilead, whom he took as wife when he was sixty years old; and
she bore him Segub. \bibleverse{22} Segub became the father of Jair, who
had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead. \bibleverse{23} Geshur
and Aram took the towns of Jair from them, with Kenath, and its
villages, even sixty cities. All these were the sons of Machir the
father of Gilead. \bibleverse{24} After Hezron died in Caleb Ephrathah,
Abijah, Hezron's wife, bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.

\bibleverse{25} The sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were Ram
the firstborn, Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah. \bibleverse{26} Jerahmeel
had another wife, whose name was Atarah. She was the mother of Onam.
\bibleverse{27} The sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were Maaz,
Jamin, and Eker. \bibleverse{28} The sons of Onam were Shammai and Jada.
The sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur. \bibleverse{29} The name of the
wife of Abishur was Abihail; and she bore him Ahban and Molid.
\bibleverse{30} The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim; but Seled died
without children. \bibleverse{31} The son of Appaim: Ishi. The son of
Ishi: Sheshan. The son of Sheshan: Ahlai. \bibleverse{32} The sons of
Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether and Jonathan; and Jether died
without children. \bibleverse{33} The sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza.
These were the sons of Jerahmeel. \bibleverse{34} Now Sheshan had no
sons, but only daughters. Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name
was Jarha. \bibleverse{35} Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his
servant as wife; and she bore him Attai. \bibleverse{36} Attai became
the father of Nathan, and Nathan became the father of Zabad,
\bibleverse{37} and Zabad became the father of Ephlal, and Ephlal became
the father of Obed, \bibleverse{38} and Obed became the father of Jehu,
and Jehu became the father of Azariah, \bibleverse{39} and Azariah
became the father of Helez, and Helez became the father of Eleasah,
\bibleverse{40} and Eleasah became the father of Sismai, and Sismai
became the father of Shallum, \bibleverse{41} and Shallum became the
father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah became the father of Elishama.

\bibleverse{42} The sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha
his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph, and the sons of Mareshah the
father of Hebron. \bibleverse{43} The sons of Hebron: Korah, Tappuah,
Rekem, and Shema. \bibleverse{44} Shema became the father of Raham, the
father of Jorkeam; and Rekem became the father of Shammai.
\bibleverse{45} The son of Shammai was Maon; and Maon was the father of
Beth Zur. \bibleverse{46} Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bore Haran, Moza,
and Gazez; and Haran became the father of Gazez. \bibleverse{47} The
sons of Jahdai: Regem, Jothan, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph.
\bibleverse{48} Maacah, Caleb's concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
\bibleverse{49} She bore also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the
father of Machbena and the father of Gibea; and the daughter of Caleb
was Achsah.

\bibleverse{50} These were the sons of Caleb, the son of Hur, the
firstborn of Ephrathah: Shobal the father of Kiriath Jearim,
\bibleverse{51} Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of
Beth Gader. \bibleverse{52} Shobal the father of Kiriath Jearim had
sons: Haroeh, half of the Menuhoth. \bibleverse{53} The families of
Kiriath Jearim: the Ithrites, the Puthites, the Shumathites, and the
Mishraites; from them came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites.
\bibleverse{54} The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, the Netophathites, Atroth
Beth Joab, and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites. \bibleverse{55}
The families of scribes who lived at Jabez: the Tirathites, the
Shimeathites, and the Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came from
Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Now these were the sons of David, who were born to him in
Hebron: the firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second,
Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess; \bibleverse{2} the third, Absalom
the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth,
Adonijah the son of Haggith; \bibleverse{3} the fifth, Shephatiah of
Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife: \bibleverse{4} six were
born to him in Hebron; and he reigned there seven years and six months.
He reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem; \bibleverse{5} and these
were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,
four, by Bathshua the daughter of Ammiel; \bibleverse{6} and Ibhar,
Elishama, Eliphelet, \bibleverse{7} Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia,
\bibleverse{8} Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine. \bibleverse{9} All
these were the sons of David, in addition to the sons of the concubines;
and Tamar was their sister.

\bibleverse{10} Solomon's son was Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son,
Jehoshaphat his son, \bibleverse{11} Joram his son, Ahaziah his son,
Joash his son, \bibleverse{12} Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham
his son, \bibleverse{13} Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his
son, \bibleverse{14} Amon his son, and Josiah his son. \bibleverse{15}
The sons of Josiah: the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the
third Zedekiah, and the fourth Shallum. \bibleverse{16} The sons of
Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, and Zedekiah his son. \bibleverse{17} The
sons of Jeconiah, the captive: Shealtiel his son, \bibleverse{18}
Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
\bibleverse{19} The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei. The sons of
Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah; and Shelomith was their sister;
\bibleverse{20} and Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and Jushab
Hesed, five. \bibleverse{21} The sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah and
Jeshaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah,
the sons of Shecaniah. \bibleverse{22} The son of Shecaniah: Shemaiah.
The sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
\bibleverse{23} The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam,
three. \bibleverse{24} The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib,
Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani, seven.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal.
\bibleverse{2} Reaiah the son of Shobal became the father of Jahath; and
Jahath became the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These are the families of
the Zorathites. \bibleverse{3} These were the sons of the father of
Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash. The name of their sister was
Hazzelelponi. \bibleverse{4} Penuel was the father of Gedor and Ezer the
father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah,
the father of Bethlehem. \bibleverse{5} Ashhur the father of Tekoa had
two wives, Helah and Naarah. \bibleverse{6} Naarah bore him Ahuzzam,
Hepher, Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
\bibleverse{7} The sons of Helah were Zereth, Izhar, and Ethnan.
\bibleverse{8} Hakkoz became the father of Anub, Zobebah, and the
families of Aharhel the son of Harum.

\bibleverse{9} Jabez was more honourable than his brothers. His mother
named him Jabez,\footnote{\textbf{4:9} ``Jabez'' sounds similar to the
  Hebrew word for ``pain''.} saying, ``Because I bore him with sorrow.''

\bibleverse{10} Jabez called on the God\footnote{\textbf{4:10} The
  Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``אֱלֹהִ֑ים'' (Elohim).} of Israel,
saying, ``Oh that you would bless me indeed, and enlarge my border! May
your hand be with me, and may you keep me from evil, that I may not
cause pain!''

God granted him that which he requested.

\bibleverse{11} Chelub the brother of Shuhah became the father of Mehir,
who was the father of Eshton. \bibleverse{12} Eshton became the father
of Beth Rapha, Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir Nahash. These are
the men of Recah. \bibleverse{13} The sons of Kenaz: Othniel and
Seraiah. The sons of Othniel: Hathath.\footnote{\textbf{4:13} Greek and
  Vulgate add ``and Meonothai''} \bibleverse{14} Meonothai became the
father of Ophrah: and Seraiah became the father of Joab the father of Ge
Harashim, for they were craftsmen. \bibleverse{15} The sons of Caleb the
son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam. The son of Elah: Kenaz.
\bibleverse{16} The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.
\bibleverse{17} The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered, Epher, and Jalon; and
Mered's wife bore Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
\bibleverse{18} His wife the Jewess bore Jered the father of Gedor,
Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. These are
the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took.
\bibleverse{19} The sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham,
were the fathers of Keilah the Garmite and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
\bibleverse{20} The sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Ben Hanan, and Tilon.
The sons of Ishi: Zoheth, and Ben Zoheth. \bibleverse{21} The sons of
Shelah the son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, Laadah the father of
Mareshah, and the families of the house of those who worked fine linen,
of the house of Ashbea; \bibleverse{22} and Jokim, and the men of
Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had dominion in Moab, and
Jashubilehem. These records are ancient. \bibleverse{23} These were the
potters, and the inhabitants of Netaim and Gederah; they lived there
with the king for his work.

\bibleverse{24} The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;
\bibleverse{25} Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, and Mishma his son.
\bibleverse{26} The sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son,
Shimei his son. \bibleverse{27} Shimei had sixteen sons and six
daughters; but his brothers didn't have many children, and all their
family didn't multiply like the children of Judah. \bibleverse{28} They
lived at Beersheba, Moladah, Hazarshual, \bibleverse{29} at Bilhah, at
Ezem, at Tolad, \bibleverse{30} at Bethuel, at Hormah, at Ziklag,
\bibleverse{31} at Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susim, at Beth Biri, and at
Shaaraim. These were their cities until David's reign. \bibleverse{32}
Their villages were Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan, five cities;
\bibleverse{33} and all their villages that were around the same cities,
as far as Baal. These were their settlements, and they kept their
genealogy. \bibleverse{34} Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah the son of Amaziah,
\bibleverse{35} Joel, Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the
son of Asiel, \bibleverse{36} Elioenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah,
Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah, \bibleverse{37} and Ziza the son of Shiphi,
the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of
Shemaiah--- \bibleverse{38} these mentioned by name were princes in
their families. Their fathers' houses increased greatly.

\bibleverse{39} They went to the entrance of Gedor, even to the east
side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks. \bibleverse{40}
They found rich, good pasture, and the land was wide, and quiet, and
peaceful, for those who lived there before were descended from Ham.
\bibleverse{41} These written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king
of Judah, and struck their tents and the Meunim who were found there;
and they destroyed them utterly to this day, and lived in their place,
because there was pasture there for their flocks. \bibleverse{42} Some
of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to Mount
Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel,
the sons of Ishi. \bibleverse{43} They struck the remnant of the
Amalekites who escaped, and have lived there to this day.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel (for he was
the firstborn, but because he defiled his father's couch, his birthright
was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel; and the genealogy is
not to be listed according to the birthright. \bibleverse{2} For Judah
prevailed above his brothers, and from him came the prince; but the
birthright was Joseph's)--- \bibleverse{3} the sons of Reuben the
firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. \bibleverse{4}
The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
\bibleverse{5} Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
\bibleverse{6} and Beerah his son, whom Tilgath Pilneser king of Assyria
carried away captive. He was prince of the Reubenites. \bibleverse{7}
His brothers by their families, when the genealogy of their generations
was listed: the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, \bibleverse{8} and Bela the
son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who lived in Aroer, even
to Nebo and Baal Meon; \bibleverse{9} and he lived eastward even to the
entrance of the wilderness from the river Euphrates, because their
livestock were multiplied in the land of Gilead.

\bibleverse{10} In the days of Saul, they made war with the Hagrites,
who fell by their hand; and they lived in their tents throughout all the
land east of Gilead.

\bibleverse{11} The sons of Gad lived beside them in the land of Bashan
to Salecah: \bibleverse{12} Joel the chief, Shapham the second, Janai,
and Shaphat in Bashan. \bibleverse{13} Their brothers of their fathers'
houses: Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber, seven.
\bibleverse{14} These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son
of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai,
the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz; \bibleverse{15} Ahi the son of Abdiel,
the son of Guni, chief of their fathers' houses. \bibleverse{16} They
lived in Gilead in Bashan and in its towns, and in all the pasture lands
of Sharon as far as their borders. \bibleverse{17} All these were listed
by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam king of Israel.

\bibleverse{18} The sons of Reuben, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, able to
shoot with bow, and skilful in war, were forty-four thousand and seven
hundred and sixty that were able to go out to war. \bibleverse{19} They
made war with the Hagrites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and Nodab.
\bibleverse{20} They were helped against them, and the Hagrites were
delivered into their hand, and all who were with them; for they cried to
God in the battle, and he answered them because they put their trust in
him. \bibleverse{21} They took away their livestock: of their camels
fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of
donkeys two thousand, and of men one hundred thousand. \bibleverse{22}
For many fell slain, because the war was of God. They lived in their
place until the captivity.

\bibleverse{23} The children of the half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the
land. They increased from Bashan to Baal Hermon, Senir, and Mount
Hermon. \bibleverse{24} These were the heads of their fathers' houses:
Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel---mighty men
of valour, famous men, heads of their fathers' houses. \bibleverse{25}
They trespassed against the God of their fathers, and played the
prostitute after the gods of the peoples of the land whom God destroyed
before them. \bibleverse{26} So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit
of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath Pilneser king of
Assyria, and he carried away the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the
half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought them to Halah, Habor, Hara, and to
the river of Gozan, to this day.

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
\bibleverse{2} The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
\bibleverse{3} The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. The sons
of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. \bibleverse{4} Eleazar
became the father of Phinehas, Phinehas became the father of Abishua,
\bibleverse{5} Abishua became the father of Bukki. Bukki became the
father of Uzzi. \bibleverse{6} Uzzi became the father of Zerahiah.
Zerahiah became the father of Meraioth. \bibleverse{7} Meraioth became
the father of Amariah. Amariah became the father of Ahitub.
\bibleverse{8} Ahitub became the father of Zadok. Zadok became the
father of Ahimaaz. \bibleverse{9} Ahimaaz became the father of Azariah.
Azariah became the father of Johanan. \bibleverse{10} Johanan became the
father of Azariah, who executed the priest's office in the house that
Solomon built in Jerusalem. \bibleverse{11} Azariah became the father of
Amariah. Amariah became the father of Ahitub. \bibleverse{12} Ahitub
became the father of Zadok. Zadok became the father of Shallum.
\bibleverse{13} Shallum became the father of Hilkiah. Hilkiah became the
father of Azariah. \bibleverse{14} Azariah became the father of Seraiah.
Seraiah became the father of Jehozadak. \bibleverse{15} Jehozadak went
into captivity when the LORD carried Judah and Jerusalem away by the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

\bibleverse{16} The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
\bibleverse{17} These are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and
Shimei. \bibleverse{18} The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron,
and Uzziel. \bibleverse{19} The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These
are the families of the Levites according to their fathers' households.
\bibleverse{20} Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his
son, \bibleverse{21} Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, and
Jeatherai his son. \bibleverse{22} The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his
son, Korah his son, Assir his son, \bibleverse{23} Elkanah his son,
Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son, \bibleverse{24} Tahath his son, Uriel
his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son. \bibleverse{25} The sons of
Elkanah: Amasai and Ahimoth. \bibleverse{26} As for Elkanah, the sons of
Elkanah: Zophai his son, Nahath his son, \bibleverse{27} Eliab his son,
Jeroham his son, and Elkanah his son. \bibleverse{28} The sons of
Samuel: the firstborn, Joel, and the second, Abijah. \bibleverse{29} The
sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,
\bibleverse{30} Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.

\bibleverse{31} These are they whom David set over the service of song
in the LORD's house after the ark came to rest there. \bibleverse{32}
They ministered with song before the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting
until Solomon had built the LORD's house in Jerusalem. They performed
the duties of their office according to their order. \bibleverse{33}
These are those who served, and their sons. Of the sons of the
Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,
\bibleverse{34} the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of
Eliel, the son of Toah, \bibleverse{35} the son of Zuph, the son of
Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai, \bibleverse{36} the son
of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,
\bibleverse{37} the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of
Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, \bibleverse{38} the son of Izhar, the son of
Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel. \bibleverse{39} His brother
Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berechiah, the
son of Shimea, \bibleverse{40} the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah,
the son of Malchijah, \bibleverse{41} the son of Ethni, the son of
Zerah, the son of Adaiah, \bibleverse{42} the son of Ethan, the son of
Zimmah, the son of Shimei, \bibleverse{43} the son of Jahath, the son of
Gershom, the son of Levi. \bibleverse{44} On the left hand their
brothers the sons of Merari: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi,
the son of Malluch, \bibleverse{45} the son of Hashabiah, the son of
Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah, \bibleverse{46} the son of Amzi, the son of
Bani, the son of Shemer, \bibleverse{47} the son of Mahli, the son of
Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi. \bibleverse{48} Their
brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the
tabernacle of God's house. \bibleverse{49} But Aaron and his sons
offered on the altar of burnt offering, and on the altar of incense, for
all the work of the most holy place, and to make atonement for Israel,
according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.

\bibleverse{50} These are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas
his son, Abishua his son, \bibleverse{51} Bukki his son, Uzzi his son,
Zerahiah his son, \bibleverse{52} Meraioth his son, Amariah his son,
Ahitub his son, \bibleverse{53} Zadok his son, and Ahimaaz his son.
\bibleverse{54} Now these are their dwelling places according to their
encampments in their borders: to the sons of Aaron, of the families of
the Kohathites (for theirs was the first lot), \bibleverse{55} to them
they gave Hebron in the land of Judah, and its pasture lands around it;
\bibleverse{56} but the fields of the city and its villages, they gave
to Caleb the son of Jephunneh. \bibleverse{57} To the sons of Aaron they
gave the cities of refuge, Hebron, Libnah also with its pasture lands,
Jattir, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands, \bibleverse{58} Hilen with its
pasture lands, Debir with its pasture lands, \bibleverse{59} Ashan with
its pasture lands, and Beth Shemesh with its pasture lands;
\bibleverse{60} and out of the tribe of Benjamin, Geba with its pasture
lands, Allemeth with its pasture lands, and Anathoth with its pasture
lands. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.

\bibleverse{61} To the rest of the sons of Kohath were given by lot, out
of the family of the tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh,
ten cities. \bibleverse{62} To the sons of Gershom, according to their
families, out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher,
and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in
Bashan, thirteen cities. \bibleverse{63} To the sons of Merari were
given by lot, according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben,
and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve
cities. \bibleverse{64} The children of Israel gave to the Levites the
cities with their pasture lands. \bibleverse{65} They gave by lot out of
the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children
of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these
cities which are mentioned by name.

\bibleverse{66} Some of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of
their borders out of the tribe of Ephraim. \bibleverse{67} They gave to
them the cities of refuge, Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim with
its pasture lands and Gezer with its pasture lands, \bibleverse{68}
Jokmeam with its pasture lands, Beth Horon with its pasture lands,
\bibleverse{69} Aijalon with its pasture lands, Gath Rimmon with its
pasture lands; \bibleverse{70} and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh,
Aner with its pasture lands, and Bileam with its pasture lands, for the
rest of the family of the sons of Kohath.

\bibleverse{71} To the sons of Gershom were given, out of the family of
the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its pasture lands, and
Ashtaroth with its pasture lands; \bibleverse{72} and out of the tribe
of Issachar, Kedesh with its pasture lands, Daberath with its pasture
lands, \bibleverse{73} Ramoth with its pasture lands, and Anem with its
pasture lands; \bibleverse{74} and out of the tribe of Asher, Mashal
with its pasture lands, Abdon with its pasture lands, \bibleverse{75}
Hukok with its pasture lands, and Rehob with its pasture lands;
\bibleverse{76} and out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with
its pasture lands, Hammon with its pasture lands, and Kiriathaim with
its pasture lands.

\bibleverse{77} To the rest of the Levites, the sons of Merari, were
given, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with its pasture lands, and
Tabor with its pasture lands; \bibleverse{78} and beyond the Jordan at
Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, were given them out of the
tribe of Reuben: Bezer in the wilderness with its pasture lands, Jahzah
with its pasture lands, \bibleverse{79} Kedemoth with its pasture lands,
and Mephaath with its pasture lands; \bibleverse{80} and out of the
tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its pasture lands, Mahanaim with its
pasture lands, \bibleverse{81} Heshbon with its pasture lands, and Jazer
with its pasture lands.

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} Of the sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron,
four. \bibleverse{2} The sons of Tola: Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai,
Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their fathers' houses, of Tola; mighty men
of valour in their generations. Their number in the days of David was
twenty-two thousand and six hundred. \bibleverse{3} The son of Uzzi:
Izrahiah. The sons of Izrahiah: Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah,
five; all of them chief men. \bibleverse{4} With them, by their
generations, after their fathers' houses, were bands of the army for
war, thirty-six thousand; for they had many wives and sons.
\bibleverse{5} Their brothers amongst all the families of Issachar,
mighty men of valour, listed in all by genealogy, were eighty-seven
thousand.

\bibleverse{6} The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, and Jediael, three.
\bibleverse{7} The sons of Bela: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri,
five; heads of fathers' houses, mighty men of valour; and they were
listed by genealogy twenty-two thousand and thirty-four. \bibleverse{8}
The sons of Becher: Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth,
Abijah, Anathoth, and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.
\bibleverse{9} They were listed by genealogy, after their generations,
heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valour, twenty thousand
and two hundred. \bibleverse{10} The son of Jediael: Bilhan. The sons of
Bilhan: Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Chenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and
Ahishahar. \bibleverse{11} All these were sons of Jediael, according to
the heads of their fathers' households, mighty men of valour, seventeen
thousand and two hundred, who were able to go out in the army for war.
\bibleverse{12} So were Shuppim, Huppim, the sons of Ir, Hushim, and the
sons of Aher.

\bibleverse{13} The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, Shallum, and
the sons of Bilhah.

\bibleverse{14} The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his concubine the
Aramitess bore. She bore Machir the father of Gilead. \bibleverse{15}
Machir took a wife of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister's name was
Maacah. The name of the second was Zelophehad; and Zelophehad had
daughters. \bibleverse{16} Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she
named him Peresh. The name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were
Ulam and Rakem. \bibleverse{17} The sons of Ulam: Bedan. These were the
sons of Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh. \bibleverse{18}
His sister Hammolecheth bore Ishhod, Abiezer, and Mahlah.
\bibleverse{19} The sons of Shemida were Ahian, Shechem, Likhi, and
Aniam.

\bibleverse{20} The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, Bered his son, Tahath
his son, Eleadah his son, Tahath his son, \bibleverse{21} Zabad his son,
Shuthelah his son, Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath who were born
in the land killed, because they came down to take away their livestock.
\bibleverse{22} Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brothers
came to comfort him. \bibleverse{23} He went in to his wife, and she
conceived and bore a son, and he named him Beriah,\footnote{\textbf{7:23}
  ``Beriah'' is similar to the Hebrew word for ``misfortune''.} because
there was trouble with his house. \bibleverse{24} His daughter was
Sheerah, who built Beth Horon the lower and the upper, and Uzzen
Sheerah. \bibleverse{25} Rephah was his son, Resheph his son, Telah his
son, Tahan his son, \bibleverse{26} Ladan his son, Ammihud his son,
Elishama his son, \bibleverse{27} Nun his son, and Joshua his son.
\bibleverse{28} Their possessions and settlements were Bethel and its
towns, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer with its towns; Shechem
also and its towns, to Azzah and its towns; \bibleverse{29} and by the
borders of the children of Manasseh, Beth Shean and its towns, Taanach
and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, and Dor and its towns. The
children of Joseph the son of Israel lived in these.

\bibleverse{30} The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, and Beriah.
Serah was their sister. \bibleverse{31} The sons of Beriah: Heber and
Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith. \bibleverse{32} Heber became
the father of Japhlet, Shomer, Hotham, and Shua their sister.
\bibleverse{33} The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, Bimhal, and Ashvath. These
are the children of Japhlet. \bibleverse{34} The sons of Shemer: Ahi,
Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram. \bibleverse{35} The sons of Helem his
brother: Zophah, Imna, Shelesh, and Amal. \bibleverse{36} The sons of
Zophah: Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah, \bibleverse{37} Bezer, Hod,
Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera. \bibleverse{38} The sons of Jether:
Jephunneh, Pispa, and Ara. \bibleverse{39} The sons of Ulla: Arah,
Hanniel, and Rizia. \bibleverse{40} All these were the children of
Asher, heads of the fathers' houses, choice and mighty men of valour,
chief of the princes. The number of them listed by genealogy for service
in war was twenty-six thousand men.

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Benjamin became the father of Bela his firstborn, Ashbel
the second, Aharah the third, \bibleverse{2} Nohah the fourth, and Rapha
the fifth. \bibleverse{3} Bela had sons: Addar, Gera, Abihud,
\bibleverse{4} Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, \bibleverse{5} Gera, Shephuphan,
and Huram. \bibleverse{6} These are the sons of Ehud. These are the
heads of fathers' households of the inhabitants of Geba, who were
carried captive to Manahath: \bibleverse{7} Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera,
who carried them captive; and he became the father of Uzza and Ahihud.

\bibleverse{8} Shaharaim became the father of children in the field of
Moab, after he had sent them away. Hushim and Baara were his wives.
\bibleverse{9} By Hodesh his wife, he became the father of Jobab, Zibia,
Mesha, Malcam, \bibleverse{10} Jeuz, Shachia, and Mirmah. These were his
sons, heads of fathers' households. \bibleverse{11} By Hushim, he became
the father of Abitub and Elpaal. \bibleverse{12} The sons of Elpaal:
Eber, Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono and Lod, with its towns;
\bibleverse{13} and Beriah and Shema, who were heads of fathers'
households of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who put to flight the
inhabitants of Gath; \bibleverse{14} and Ahio, Shashak, Jeremoth,
\bibleverse{15} Zebadiah, Arad, Eder, \bibleverse{16} Michael, Ishpah,
Joha, the sons of Beriah, \bibleverse{17} Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki,
Heber, \bibleverse{18} Ishmerai, Izliah, Jobab, the sons of Elpaal,
\bibleverse{19} Jakim, Zichri, Zabdi, \bibleverse{20} Elienai,
Zillethai, Eliel, \bibleverse{21} Adaiah, Beraiah, Shimrath, the sons of
Shimei, \bibleverse{22} Ishpan, Eber, Eliel, \bibleverse{23} Abdon,
Zichri, Hanan, \bibleverse{24} Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah,
\bibleverse{25} Iphdeiah, Penuel, the sons of Shashak, \bibleverse{26}
Shamsherai, Shehariah, Athaliah, \bibleverse{27} Jaareshiah, Elijah,
Zichri, and the sons of Jeroham. \bibleverse{28} These were heads of
fathers' households throughout their generations, chief men. These lived
in Jerusalem.

\bibleverse{29} The father of Gibeon, whose wife's name was Maacah,
lived in Gibeon \bibleverse{30} with his firstborn son Abdon, Zur, Kish,
Baal, Nadab, \bibleverse{31} Gedor, Ahio, Zecher, \bibleverse{32} and
Mikloth, who became the father of Shimeah. They also lived with their
families in Jerusalem, near their relatives. \bibleverse{33} Ner became
the father of Kish. Kish became the father of Saul. Saul became the
father of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal. \bibleverse{34}
The son of Jonathan was Merib-baal. Merib-baal became the father of
Micah. \bibleverse{35} The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and
Ahaz. \bibleverse{36} Ahaz became the father of Jehoaddah. Jehoaddah
became the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri became the
father of Moza. \bibleverse{37} Moza became the father of Binea. Raphah
was his son, Eleasah his son, and Azel his son. \bibleverse{38} Azel had
six sons, whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah,
Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel. \bibleverse{39} The
sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and
Eliphelet the third. \bibleverse{40} The sons of Ulam were mighty men of
valour, archers, and had many sons, and grandsons, one hundred and
fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} So all Israel were listed by genealogies; and
behold,\footnote{\textbf{9:1} ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look
  at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an
  interjection.} they are written in the book of the kings of Israel.
Judah was carried away captive to Babylon for their disobedience.
\bibleverse{2} Now the first inhabitants who lived in their possessions
in their cities were Israel, the priests, the Levites, and the temple
servants. \bibleverse{3} In Jerusalem, there lived of the children of
Judah, of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim and
Manasseh: \bibleverse{4} Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the
son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Perez the son of Judah.
\bibleverse{5} Of the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn and his sons.
\bibleverse{6} Of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel and their brothers, six
hundred and ninety. \bibleverse{7} Of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the
son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah;
\bibleverse{8} and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi,
the son of Michri; and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of
Reuel, the son of Ibnijah; \bibleverse{9} and their brothers, according
to their generations, nine hundred and fifty-six. All these men were
heads of fathers' households by their fathers' houses.

\bibleverse{10} Of the priests: Jedaiah, Jehoiarib, Jachin,
\bibleverse{11} and Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam,
the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of
God's house; \bibleverse{12} and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of
Pashhur, the son of Malchijah; and Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of
Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of
Immer; \bibleverse{13} and their brothers, heads of their fathers'
houses, one thousand and seven hundred and sixty; they were very able
men for the work of the service of God's house.

\bibleverse{14} Of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of
Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari; \bibleverse{15}
and Bakbakkar, Heresh, Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of
Zichri, the son of Asaph, \bibleverse{16} and Obadiah the son of
Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun; and Berechiah the son
of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the
Netophathites.

\bibleverse{17} The gatekeepers: Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman, and
their brothers (Shallum was the chief), \bibleverse{18} who previously
served in the king's gate eastward. They were the gatekeepers for the
camp of the children of Levi. \bibleverse{19} Shallum was the son of
Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brothers, of his
father's house, the Korahites, were over the work of the service,
keepers of the thresholds of the tent. Their fathers had been over the
LORD's camp, keepers of the entry. \bibleverse{20} Phinehas the son of
Eleazar was ruler over them in time past, and the LORD was with him.
\bibleverse{21} Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was gatekeeper of the
door of the Tent of Meeting. \bibleverse{22} All these who were chosen
to be gatekeepers in the thresholds were two hundred and twelve. These
were listed by genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the
seer ordained in their office of trust. \bibleverse{23} So they and
their children had the oversight of the gates of the LORD's house, even
the house of the tent, as guards. \bibleverse{24} On the four sides were
the gatekeepers, towards the east, west, north, and south.
\bibleverse{25} Their brothers, in their villages, were to come in every
seven days from time to time to be with them, \bibleverse{26} for the
four chief gatekeepers, who were Levites, were in an office of trust,
and were over the rooms and over the treasuries in God's house.
\bibleverse{27} They stayed around God's house, because that was their
duty; and it was their duty to open it morning by morning.

\bibleverse{28} Certain of them were in charge of the vessels of
service, for these were brought in by count, and these were taken out by
count. \bibleverse{29} Some of them also were appointed over the
furniture, and over all the vessels of the sanctuary, over the fine
flour, the wine, the oil, the frankincense, and the spices.

\bibleverse{30} Some of the sons of the priests prepared the mixing of
the spices. \bibleverse{31} Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the
firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the office of trust over the
things that were baked in pans. \bibleverse{32} Some of their brothers,
of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the show bread, to prepare it
every Sabbath.

\bibleverse{33} These are the singers, heads of fathers' households of
the Levites, who lived in the rooms and were free from other service,
for they were employed in their work day and night. \bibleverse{34}
These were heads of fathers' households of the Levites, throughout their
generations, chief men. They lived at Jerusalem.

\bibleverse{35} Jeiel the father of Gibeon, whose wife's name was
Maacah, lived in Gibeon. \bibleverse{36} His firstborn son was Abdon,
then Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, \bibleverse{37} Gedor, Ahio,
Zechariah, and Mikloth. \bibleverse{38} Mikloth became the father of
Shimeam. They also lived with their relatives in Jerusalem, near their
relatives. \bibleverse{39} Ner became the father of Kish. Kish became
the father of Saul. Saul became the father of Jonathan, Malchishua,
Abinadab, and Eshbaal. \bibleverse{40} The son of Jonathan was
Merib-baal. Merib-baal became the father of Micah. \bibleverse{41} The
sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tahrea, and Ahaz. \bibleverse{42} Ahaz
became the father of Jarah. Jarah became the father of Alemeth,
Azmaveth, and Zimri. Zimri became the father of Moza. \bibleverse{43}
Moza became the father of Binea, Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, and
Azel his son. \bibleverse{44} Azel had six sons, whose names are
Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. These were the
sons of Azel.

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of
Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain on Mount
Gilboa. \bibleverse{2} The Philistines followed hard after Saul and
after his sons; and the Philistines killed Jonathan, Abinadab, and
Malchishua, the sons of Saul. \bibleverse{3} The battle went hard
against Saul, and the archers overtook him; and he was distressed by
reason of the archers. \bibleverse{4} Then Saul said to his armour
bearer, ``Draw your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these
uncircumcised come and abuse me.''

But his armour bearer would not, for he was terrified. Therefore Saul
took his sword and fell on it. \bibleverse{5} When his armour bearer saw
that Saul was dead, he likewise fell on his sword and died.
\bibleverse{6} So Saul died with his three sons; and all his house died
together. \bibleverse{7} When all the men of Israel who were in the
valley saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they
abandoned their cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and lived in
them.

\bibleverse{8} On the next day, when the Philistines came to strip the
slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.
\bibleverse{9} They stripped him and took his head and his armour, then
sent into the land of the Philistines all around to carry the news to
their idols and to the people. \bibleverse{10} They put his armour in
the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the house of Dagon.
\bibleverse{11} When all Jabesh Gilead heard all that the Philistines
had done to Saul, \bibleverse{12} all the valiant men arose and took
away the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to
Jabesh, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven
days.

\bibleverse{13} So Saul died for his trespass which he committed against
the LORD, because of the LORD's word, which he didn't keep, and also
because he asked counsel of one who had a familiar spirit, to enquire,
\bibleverse{14} and didn't enquire of the LORD. Therefore he killed him,
and turned the kingdom over to David the son of Jesse.

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Then all Israel gathered themselves to David to Hebron,
saying, ``Behold, we are your bone and your flesh. \bibleverse{2} In
times past, even when Saul was king, it was you who led out and brought
in Israel. The LORD your God said to you, `You shall be shepherd of my
people Israel, and you shall be prince over my people Israel.'\,''

\bibleverse{3} So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron;
and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the LORD. They
anointed David king over Israel, according to the LORD's word by Samuel.

\bibleverse{4} David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (also called
Jebus); and the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, were there.
\bibleverse{5} The inhabitants of Jebus said to David, ``You will not
come in here!'' Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion. The same
is David's city. \bibleverse{6} David had said, ``Whoever strikes the
Jebusites first shall be chief and captain.'' Joab the son of Zeruiah
went up first, and was made chief. \bibleverse{7} David lived in the
stronghold; therefore they called it David's city. \bibleverse{8} He
built the city all around, from Millo even around; and Joab repaired the
rest of the city. \bibleverse{9} David grew greater and greater, for the
LORD of Armies was with him.

\bibleverse{10} Now these are the chief of the mighty men whom David
had, who showed themselves strong with him in his kingdom, together with
all Israel, to make him king, according to the LORD's word concerning
Israel.

\bibleverse{11} This is the number of the mighty men whom David had:
Jashobeam, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the thirty; he lifted
up his spear against three hundred and killed them at one time.
\bibleverse{12} After him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who
was one of the three mighty men. \bibleverse{13} He was with David at
Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle,
where there was a plot of ground full of barley; and the people fled
from before the Philistines. \bibleverse{14} They stood in the middle of
the plot, defended it, and killed the Philistines; and the LORD saved
them by a great victory.

\bibleverse{15} Three of the thirty chief men went down to the rock to
David, into the cave of Adullam; and the army of the Philistines were
encamped in the valley of Rephaim. \bibleverse{16} David was then in the
stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was in Bethlehem at that
time. \bibleverse{17} David longed, and said, ``Oh, that someone would
give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem, which is by the
gate!''

\bibleverse{18} The three broke through the army of the Philistines, and
drew water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, took it,
and brought it to David; but David would not drink any of it, but poured
it out to the LORD, \bibleverse{19} and said, ``My God forbid me, that I
should do this! Shall I drink the blood of these men who have put their
lives in jeopardy?'' For they risked their lives to bring it. Therefore
he would not drink it. The three mighty men did these things.

\bibleverse{20} Abishai, the brother of Joab, was chief of the three;
for he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them, and
had a name amongst the three. \bibleverse{21} Of the three, he was more
honourable than the two, and was made their captain; however he wasn't
included in the three.

\bibleverse{22} Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of
Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, killed the two sons of Ariel of
Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in the middle of a pit on a
snowy day. \bibleverse{23} He killed an Egyptian, a man of great
stature, five cubits\footnote{\textbf{11:23} A cubit is the length from
  the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man's arm, or about 18
  inches or 46 centimetres. Therefore this Egyptian was bout 7 feet and
  6 inches or 2. 28 metres tall.} high. In the Egyptian's hand was a
spear like a weaver's beam; and he went down to him with a staff,
plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and killed him with his
own spear. \bibleverse{24} Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did these things
and had a name amongst the three mighty men. \bibleverse{25} Behold, he
was more honourable than the thirty, but he didn't attain to the three;
and David set him over his guard.

\bibleverse{26} The mighty men of the armies also include Asahel the
brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, \bibleverse{27}
Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite, \bibleverse{28} Ira the son
of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite, \bibleverse{29} Sibbecai
the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite, \bibleverse{30} Maharai the
Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite, \bibleverse{31}
Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, Benaiah
the Pirathonite, \bibleverse{32} Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the
Arbathite, \bibleverse{33} Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the
Shaalbonite, \bibleverse{34} the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan
the son of Shagee the Hararite, \bibleverse{35} Ahiam the son of Sacar
the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur, \bibleverse{36} Hepher the
Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, \bibleverse{37} Hezro the Carmelite,
Naarai the son of Ezbai, \bibleverse{38} Joel the brother of Nathan,
Mibhar the son of Hagri, \bibleverse{39} Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the
Berothite (the armour bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah),
\bibleverse{40} Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, \bibleverse{41}
Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, \bibleverse{42} Adina the son
of Shiza the Reubenite (a chief of the Reubenites), and thirty with him,
\bibleverse{43} Hanan the son of Maacah, Joshaphat the Mithnite,
\bibleverse{44} Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of
Hotham the Aroerite, \bibleverse{45} Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha
his brother, the Tizite, \bibleverse{46} Eliel the Mahavite, and
Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
\bibleverse{47} Eliel, Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Now these are those who came to David to Ziklag while he
was a fugitive from Saul the son of Kish. They were amongst the mighty
men, his helpers in war. \bibleverse{2} They were armed with bows, and
could use both the right hand and the left in slinging stones and in
shooting arrows from the bow. They were of Saul's relatives of the tribe
of Benjamin. \bibleverse{3} The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons
of Shemaah the Gibeathite; Jeziel and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth;
Beracah; Jehu the Anathothite; \bibleverse{4} Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a
mighty man amongst the thirty and a leader of the thirty; Jeremiah;
Jahaziel; Johanan; Jozabad the Gederathite; \bibleverse{5} Eluzai;
Jerimoth; Bealiah; Shemariah; Shephatiah the Haruphite; \bibleverse{6}
Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites;
\bibleverse{7} and Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

\bibleverse{8} Some Gadites joined David in the stronghold in the
wilderness, mighty men of valour, men trained for war, who could handle
shield and spear; whose faces were like the faces of lions, and they
were as swift as the gazelles on the mountains: \bibleverse{9} Ezer the
chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third, \bibleverse{10} Mishmannah
the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, \bibleverse{11} Attai the sixth, Eliel
the seventh, \bibleverse{12} Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
\bibleverse{13} Jeremiah the tenth, and Machbannai the eleventh.
\bibleverse{14} These of the sons of Gad were captains of the army. He
who was least was equal to one hundred, and the greatest to one
thousand. \bibleverse{15} These are those who went over the Jordan in
the first month, when it had overflowed all its banks; and they put to
flight all who lived in the valleys, both towards the east and towards
the west.

\bibleverse{16} Some of the children of Benjamin and Judah came to the
stronghold to David. \bibleverse{17} David went out to meet them, and
answered them, ``If you have come peaceably to me to help me, my heart
will be united with you; but if you have come to betray me to my
adversaries, since there is no wrong in my hands, may the God of our
fathers see this and rebuke it.'' \bibleverse{18} Then the Spirit came
on Amasai, who was chief of the thirty, and he said, ``We are yours,
David, and on your side, you son of Jesse. Peace, peace be to you, and
peace be to your helpers; for your God helps you.'' Then David received
them and made them captains of the band.

\bibleverse{19} Some of Manasseh also joined David when he came with the
Philistines against Saul to battle, but they didn't help them, for the
lords of the Philistines sent him away after consultation, saying, ``He
will desert to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.''

\bibleverse{20} As he went to Ziklag, some from Manasseh joined him:
Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai,
captains of thousands who were of Manasseh. \bibleverse{21} They helped
David against the band of raiders, for they were all mighty men of
valour and were captains in the army. \bibleverse{22} For from day to
day men came to David to help him, until there was a great army, like
God's army.

\bibleverse{23} These are the numbers of the heads of those who were
armed for war, who came to David to Hebron to turn the kingdom of Saul
to him, according to the LORD's word. \bibleverse{24} The children of
Judah who bore shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred,
armed for war. \bibleverse{25} Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of
valour for the war: seven thousand and one hundred. \bibleverse{26} Of
the children of Levi: four thousand and six hundred. \bibleverse{27}
Jehoiada was the leader of the household of Aaron; and with him were
three thousand and seven hundred, \bibleverse{28} and Zadok, a young man
mighty of valour, and of his father's house twenty-two captains.
\bibleverse{29} Of the children of Benjamin, Saul's relatives: three
thousand, for until then, the greatest part of them had kept their
allegiance to Saul's house. \bibleverse{30} Of the children of Ephraim:
twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valour, famous men in
their fathers' houses. \bibleverse{31} Of the half-tribe of Manasseh:
eighteen thousand, who were mentioned by name, to come and make David
king. \bibleverse{32} Of the children of Issachar, men who had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, their heads
were two hundred; and all their brothers were at their command.
\bibleverse{33} Of Zebulun, such as were able to go out in the army, who
could set the battle in array with all kinds of instruments of war:
fifty thousand who could command and were not of double heart.
\bibleverse{34} Of Naphtali: one thousand captains, and with them with
shield and spear thirty-seven thousand. \bibleverse{35} Of the Danites
who could set the battle in array: twenty-eight thousand and six
hundred. \bibleverse{36} Of Asher, such as were able to go out in the
army, who could set the battle in array: forty thousand. \bibleverse{37}
On the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites, the Gadites, and of
the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all kinds of instruments of war for the
battle: one hundred and twenty thousand.

\bibleverse{38} All these were men of war who could order the battle
array, and came with a perfect heart to Hebron to make David king over
all Israel; and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make
David king. \bibleverse{39} They were there with David three days,
eating and drinking; for their brothers had supplied provisions for
them. \bibleverse{40} Moreover those who were near to them, as far as
Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali, brought bread on donkeys, on camels, on
mules, and on oxen: supplies of flour, cakes of figs, clusters of
raisins, wine, oil, cattle, and sheep in abundance; for there was joy in
Israel.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} David consulted with the captains of thousands and of
hundreds, even with every leader. \bibleverse{2} David said to all the
assembly of Israel, ``If it seems good to you, and if it is of the LORD
our God, let's send word everywhere to our brothers who are left in all
the land of Israel, with whom the priests and Levites are in their
cities that have pasture lands, that they may gather themselves to us.
\bibleverse{3} Also, let's bring the ark of our God back to us again,
for we didn't seek it in the days of Saul.''

\bibleverse{4} All the assembly said that they would do so, for the
thing was right in the eyes of all the people. \bibleverse{5} So David
assembled all Israel together, from the Shihor River of Egypt even to
the entrance of Hamath, to bring God's ark from Kiriath Jearim.

\bibleverse{6} David went up with all Israel to Baalah, that is, to
Kiriath Jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up from there God the
LORD's ark that sits above the cherubim, that is called by the Name.
\bibleverse{7} They carried God's ark on a new cart, and brought it out
of Abinadab's house; and Uzza and Ahio drove the cart. \bibleverse{8}
David and all Israel played before God with all their might, even with
songs, with harps, with stringed instruments, with tambourines, with
cymbals, and with trumpets.

\bibleverse{9} When they came to Chidon's threshing floor, Uzza put out
his hand to hold the ark, for the oxen stumbled. \bibleverse{10} The
LORD's anger burnt against Uzza, and he struck him because he put his
hand on the ark; and he died there before God. \bibleverse{11} David was
displeased, because the LORD had broken out against Uzza. He called that
place Perez Uzza, to this day. \bibleverse{12} David was afraid of God
that day, saying, ``How can I bring God's ark home to me?''
\bibleverse{13} So David didn't move the ark with him into David's city,
but carried it aside into Obed-Edom the Gittite's house. \bibleverse{14}
God's ark remained with the family of Obed-Edom in his house three
months; and the LORD blessed Obed-Edom's house and all that he had.

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David with cedar
trees, masons, and carpenters, to build him a house. \bibleverse{2}
David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, for
his kingdom was highly exalted, for his people Israel's sake.

\bibleverse{3} David took more wives in Jerusalem, and David became the
father of more sons and daughters. \bibleverse{4} These are the names of
the children whom he had in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,
\bibleverse{5} Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, \bibleverse{6} Nogah, Nepheg,
Japhia, \bibleverse{7} Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.

\bibleverse{8} When the Philistines heard that David was anointed king
over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David
heard of it, and went out against them. \bibleverse{9} Now the
Philistines had come and made a raid in the valley of Rephaim.
\bibleverse{10} David enquired of God, saying, ``Shall I go up against
the Philistines? Will you deliver them into my hand?''

The LORD said to him, ``Go up; for I will deliver them into your hand.''

\bibleverse{11} So they came up to Baal Perazim, and David defeated them
there. David said, God has broken my enemies by my hand, like waters
breaking out. Therefore they called the name of that place Baal
Perazim.\footnote{\textbf{14:11} ``Baal Perazim'' means ``The Lord who
  breaks out''.} \bibleverse{12} They left their gods there; and David
gave a command, and they were burnt with fire.

\bibleverse{13} The Philistines made a another raid in the valley.
\bibleverse{14} David enquired again of God; and God said to him, ``You
shall not go up after them. Turn away from them, and come on them
opposite the mulberry trees. \bibleverse{15} When you hear the sound of
marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, then go out to battle; for
God has gone out before you to strike the army of the Philistines.''

\bibleverse{16} David did as God commanded him; and they attacked the
army of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gezer. \bibleverse{17} The
fame of David went out into all lands; and the LORD brought the fear of
him on all nations.

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} David made himself houses in David's city; and he
prepared a place for God's ark, and pitched a tent for it.
\bibleverse{2} Then David said, ``No one ought to carry God's ark but
the Levites. For the LORD has chosen them to carry God's ark, and to
minister to him forever.''

\bibleverse{3} David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem, to bring up the
LORD's ark to its place, which he had prepared for it. \bibleverse{4}
David gathered together the sons of Aaron and the Levites:
\bibleverse{5} of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief, and his brothers
one hundred and twenty; \bibleverse{6} of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the
chief, and his brothers two hundred and twenty; \bibleverse{7} of the
sons of Gershom, Joel the chief, and his brothers one hundred and
thirty; \bibleverse{8} of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief, and
his brothers two hundred; \bibleverse{9} of the sons of Hebron, Eliel
the chief, and his brothers eighty; \bibleverse{10} of the sons of
Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, and his brothers one hundred and twelve.

\bibleverse{11} David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for
the Levites: for Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab,
\bibleverse{12} and said to them, ``You are the heads of the fathers'
households of the Levites. Sanctify yourselves, both you and your
brothers, that you may bring the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, up
to the place that I have prepared for it. \bibleverse{13} For because
you didn't carry it at first, the LORD our God broke out in anger
against us, because we didn't seek him according to the ordinance.''

\bibleverse{14} So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to
bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel. \bibleverse{15} The
children of the Levites bore God's ark on their shoulders with its
poles, as Moses commanded according to the LORD's word.

\bibleverse{16} David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their
brothers as singers with instruments of music, stringed instruments,
harps, and cymbals, sounding aloud and lifting up their voices with joy.
\bibleverse{17} So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of
his brothers, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari
their brothers, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; \bibleverse{18} and with them
their brothers of the second rank: Zechariah, Ben, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth,
Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu,
Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers. \bibleverse{19} So the
singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were given cymbals of bronze to sound
aloud; \bibleverse{20} and Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni,
Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with stringed instruments set to Alamoth;
\bibleverse{21} and Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, Jeiel,
and Azaziah, with harps tuned to the eight-stringed lyre, to lead.
\bibleverse{22} Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was over the singing.
He taught the singers, because he was skilful. \bibleverse{23} Berechiah
and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark. \bibleverse{24} Shebaniah,
Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer, the
priests, blew the trumpets before God's ark; and Obed-Edom and Jehiah
were doorkeepers for the ark.

\bibleverse{25} So David, the elders of Israel, and the captains over
thousands went to bring the ark of the LORD's covenant up out of the
house of Obed-Edom with joy. \bibleverse{26} When God helped the Levites
who bore the ark of the LORD's covenant, they sacrificed seven bulls and
seven rams. \bibleverse{27} David was clothed with a robe of fine linen,
as were all the Levites who bore the ark, the singers, and Chenaniah the
choir master with the singers; and David had an ephod of linen on him.
\bibleverse{28} Thus all Israel brought the ark of the LORD's covenant
up with shouting, with sound of the cornet, with trumpets, and with
cymbals, sounding aloud with stringed instruments and harps.
\bibleverse{29} As the ark of the LORD's covenant came to David's city,
Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window, and saw king David
dancing and playing; and she despised him in her heart.

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibleverse{1} They brought in God's ark, and set it in the middle of
the tent that David had pitched for it; and they offered burnt offerings
and peace offerings before God. \bibleverse{2} When David had finished
offering the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the
people in the LORD's name. \bibleverse{3} He gave to everyone of Israel,
both man and woman, to everyone a loaf of bread, a portion of meat, and
a cake of raisins.

\bibleverse{4} He appointed some of the Levites to minister before the
LORD's ark, and to commemorate, to thank, and to praise the LORD, the
God of Israel: \bibleverse{5} Asaph the chief, and second to him
Zechariah, then Jeiel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah,
Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, with stringed instruments and with harps; and
Asaph with cymbals, sounding aloud; \bibleverse{6} with Benaiah and
Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the
covenant of God.

\bibleverse{7} Then on that day David first ordained giving of thanks to
the LORD by the hand of Asaph and his brothers. \bibleverse{8} Oh give
thanks to the LORD. Call on his name. Make what he has done known
amongst the peoples. \bibleverse{9} Sing to him. Sing praises to him.
Tell of all his marvellous works. \bibleverse{10} Glory in his holy
name. Let the heart of those who seek the LORD rejoice. \bibleverse{11}
Seek the LORD and his strength. Seek his face forever more.
\bibleverse{12} Remember his marvellous works that he has done, his
wonders, and the judgements of his mouth, \bibleverse{13} you
offspring\footnote{\textbf{16:13} or, seed} of Israel his servant, you
children of Jacob, his chosen ones. \bibleverse{14} He is the LORD our
God. His judgements are in all the earth. \bibleverse{15} Remember his
covenant forever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
\bibleverse{16} the covenant which he made with Abraham, his oath to
Isaac. \bibleverse{17} He confirmed it to Jacob for a statute, and to
Israel for an everlasting covenant, \bibleverse{18} saying, ``I will
give you the land of Canaan, The lot of your inheritance,''
\bibleverse{19} when you were but a few men in number, yes, very few,
and foreigners in it. \bibleverse{20} They went about from nation to
nation, from one kingdom to another people. \bibleverse{21} He allowed
no man to do them wrong. Yes, he reproved kings for their sakes,
\bibleverse{22} ``Don't touch my anointed ones! Do my prophets no
harm!'' \bibleverse{23} Sing to the LORD, all the earth! Display his
salvation from day to day. \bibleverse{24} Declare his glory amongst the
nations, and his marvellous works amongst all the peoples.
\bibleverse{25} For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised. He
also is to be feared above all gods. \bibleverse{26} For all the gods of
the peoples are idols, but the LORD made the heavens. \bibleverse{27}
Honour and majesty are before him. Strength and gladness are in his
place. \bibleverse{28} Ascribe to the LORD, you families of the peoples,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength! \bibleverse{29} Ascribe to the
LORD the glory due to his name. Bring an offering, and come before him.
Worship the LORD in holy array. \bibleverse{30} Tremble before him, all
the earth. The world also is established that it can't be moved.
\bibleverse{31} Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice! Let
them say amongst the nations, ``The LORD reigns!'' \bibleverse{32} Let
the sea roar, and its fullness! Let the field exult, and all that is in
it! \bibleverse{33} Then the trees of the forest will sing for joy
before the LORD, for he comes to judge the earth. \bibleverse{34} Oh
give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, for his loving kindness endures
forever. \bibleverse{35} Say, ``Save us, God of our salvation! Gather us
together and deliver us from the nations, to give thanks to your holy
name, to triumph in your praise.'' \bibleverse{36} Blessed be the LORD,
the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting.

All the people said, ``Amen,'' and praised the LORD.

\bibleverse{37} So he left Asaph and his brothers there before the ark
of the LORD's covenant, to minister before the ark continually, as every
day's work required; \bibleverse{38} and Obed-Edom with their
sixty-eight relatives; Obed-Edom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to
be doorkeepers; \bibleverse{39} and Zadok the priest and his brothers
the priests, before the LORD's tabernacle in the high place that was at
Gibeon, \bibleverse{40} to offer burnt offerings to the LORD on the
altar of burnt offering continually morning and evening, even according
to all that is written in the LORD's law, which he commanded to Israel;
\bibleverse{41} and with them Heman and Jeduthun and the rest who were
chosen, who were mentioned by name, to give thanks to the LORD, because
his loving kindness endures forever; \bibleverse{42} and with them Heman
and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should sound
aloud, and with instruments for the songs of God, and the sons of
Jeduthun to be at the gate. \bibleverse{43} All the people departed,
each man to his house; and David returned to bless his house.

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibleverse{1} When David was living in his house, David said to Nathan
the prophet, ``Behold, I live in a cedar house, but the ark of the
LORD's covenant is in a tent.''

\bibleverse{2} Nathan said to David, ``Do all that is in your heart; for
God is with you.''

\bibleverse{3} That same night, the word of God came to Nathan, saying,
\bibleverse{4} ``Go and tell David my servant, `The LORD says, ``You
shall not build me a house to dwell in; \bibleverse{5} for I have not
lived in a house since the day that I brought up Israel to this day, but
have gone from tent to tent, and from one tent to another.
\bibleverse{6} In all places in which I have walked with all Israel, did
I speak a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to be
shepherd of my people, saying, `Why have you not built me a house of
cedar?'\,''\,'

\bibleverse{7} ``Now therefore, you shall tell my servant David, `The
LORD of Armies says, ``I took you from the sheep pen, from following the
sheep, to be prince over my people Israel. \bibleverse{8} I have been
with you wherever you have gone, and have cut off all your enemies from
before you. I will make you a name like the name of the great ones who
are in the earth. \bibleverse{9} I will appoint a place for my people
Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and
be moved no more. The children of wickedness will not waste them any
more, as at the first, \bibleverse{10} and from the day that I commanded
judges to be over my people Israel. I will subdue all your enemies.
Moreover I tell you that the LORD will build you a house.
\bibleverse{11} It will happen, when your days are fulfilled that you
must go to be with your fathers, that I will set up your offspring after
you, who will be of your sons; and I will establish his kingdom.
\bibleverse{12} He will build me a house, and I will establish his
throne forever. \bibleverse{13} I will be his father, and he will be my
son. I will not take my loving kindness away from him, as I took it from
him who was before you; \bibleverse{14} but I will settle him in my
house and in my kingdom forever. His throne will be established
forever.''\,'\,'' \bibleverse{15} According to all these words, and
according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.

\bibleverse{16} Then David the king went in and sat before the LORD; and
he said, ``Who am I, LORD God, and what is my house, that you have
brought me this far? \bibleverse{17} This was a small thing in your
eyes, O God, but you have spoken of your servant's house for a great
while to come, and have respected me according to the standard of a man
of high degree, LORD God. \bibleverse{18} What can David say yet more to
you concerning the honour which is done to your servant? For you know
your servant. \bibleverse{19} LORD, for your servant's sake, and
according to your own heart, you have done all this greatness, to make
known all these great things. \bibleverse{20} LORD, there is no one like
you, neither is there any God besides you, according to all that we have
heard with our ears. \bibleverse{21} What one nation in the earth is
like your people Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a
people, to make you a name by great and awesome things, in driving out
nations from before your people whom you redeemed out of Egypt?
\bibleverse{22} For you made your people Israel your own people forever;
and you, LORD, became their God. \bibleverse{23} Now, LORD, let the word
that you have spoken concerning your servant, and concerning his house,
be established forever, and do as you have spoken. \bibleverse{24} Let
your name be established and magnified forever, saying, `The LORD of
Armies is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel. The house of David
your servant is established before you.' \bibleverse{25} For you, my
God, have revealed to your servant that you will build him a house.
Therefore your servant has found courage to pray before you.
\bibleverse{26} Now, LORD, you are God, and have promised this good
thing to your servant. \bibleverse{27} Now it has pleased you to bless
the house of your servant, that it may continue forever before you; for
you, LORD, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.''

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibleverse{1} After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued
them, and took Gath and its towns out of the hand of the Philistines.
\bibleverse{2} He defeated Moab; and the Moabites became servants to
David and brought tribute.

\bibleverse{3} David defeated Hadadezer king of Zobah, towards Hamath,
as he went to establish his dominion by the river Euphrates.
\bibleverse{4} David took from him one thousand chariots, seven thousand
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and David hamstrung all the
chariot horses, but reserved of them enough for one hundred chariots.
\bibleverse{5} When the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king
of Zobah, David struck twenty-two thousand men of the Syrians.
\bibleverse{6} Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus; and the
Syrians became servants to David and brought tribute. The LORD gave
victory to David wherever he went. \bibleverse{7} David took the shields
of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{8} From Tibhath and from Cun, cities of
Hadadezer, David took very much bronze, with which Solomon made the
bronze sea, the pillars, and the vessels of bronze.

\bibleverse{9} When Tou king of Hamath heard that David had struck all
the army of Hadadezer king of Zobah, \bibleverse{10} he sent Hadoram his
son to king David to greet him and to bless him, because he had fought
against Hadadezer and struck him (for Hadadezer had wars with Tou); and
he had with him all kinds of vessels of gold and silver and bronze.
\bibleverse{11} King David also dedicated these to the LORD, with the
silver and the gold that he carried away from all the nations: from
Edom, from Moab, from the children of Ammon, from the Philistines, and
from Amalek.

\bibleverse{12} Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah struck eighteen
thousand of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt. \bibleverse{13} He put
garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became servants to David. The
LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.

\bibleverse{14} David reigned over all Israel; and he executed justice
and righteousness for all his people. \bibleverse{15} Joab the son of
Zeruiah was over the army; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;
\bibleverse{16} Zadok the son of Ahitub and Abimelech the son of
Abiathar were priests; Shavsha was scribe; \bibleverse{17} and Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the
sons of David were chief officials serving the king.

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibleverse{1} After this, Nahash the king of the children of Ammon
died, and his son reigned in his place. \bibleverse{2} David said, ``I
will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father showed
kindness to me.''

So David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. David's
servants came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun to comfort
him. \bibleverse{3} But the princes of the children of Ammon said to
Hanun, ``Do you think that David honours your father, in that he has
sent comforters to you? Haven't his servants come to you to search, to
overthrow, and to spy out the land?'' \bibleverse{4} So Hanun took
David's servants, shaved them, and cut off their garments in the middle
at their buttocks, and sent them away. \bibleverse{5} Then some people
went and told David how the men were treated. He sent to meet them; for
the men were greatly humiliated. The king said, ``Stay at Jericho until
your beards have grown, and then return.''

\bibleverse{6} When the children of Ammon saw that they had made
themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent one
thousand talents\footnote{\textbf{19:6} A talent is about 30 kilograms
  or 66 pounds, so 1000 talents is about 30 metric tonnes} of silver to
hire chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, out of Aram-maacah, and
out of Zobah. \bibleverse{7} So they hired for themselves thirty-two
thousand chariots, and the king of Maacah with his people, who came and
encamped near Medeba. The children of Ammon gathered themselves together
from their cities, and came to battle. \bibleverse{8} When David heard
of it, he sent Joab with all the army of the mighty men. \bibleverse{9}
The children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the gate
of the city; and the kings who had come were by themselves in the field.

\bibleverse{10} Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him
before and behind, he chose some of all the choice men of Israel, and
put them in array against the Syrians. \bibleverse{11} The rest of the
people he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother; and they put
themselves in array against the children of Ammon. \bibleverse{12} He
said, ``If the Syrians are too strong for me, then you are to help me;
but if the children of Ammon are too strong for you, then I will help
you. \bibleverse{13} Be courageous, and let's be strong for our people
and for the cities of our God. May the LORD do that which seems good to
him.''

\bibleverse{14} So Joab and the people who were with him came near to
the front of the Syrians to the battle; and they fled before him.
\bibleverse{15} When the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians had
fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into
the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.

\bibleverse{16} When the Syrians saw that they were defeated by Israel,
they sent messengers and called out the Syrians who were beyond the
River,\footnote{\textbf{19:16} or, the Euphrates River} with Shophach
the captain of the army of Hadadezer leading them. \bibleverse{17} David
was told that, so he gathered all Israel together, passed over the
Jordan, came to them, and set the battle in array against them. So when
David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they fought with
him. \bibleverse{18} The Syrians fled before Israel; and David killed of
the Syrian men seven thousand charioteers and forty thousand footmen,
and also killed Shophach the captain of the army. \bibleverse{19} When
the servants of Hadadezer saw that they were defeated by Israel, they
made peace with David and served him. The Syrians would not help the
children of Ammon any more.

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibleverse{1} At the time of the return of the year, at the time when
kings go out, Joab led out the army and wasted the country of the
children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David stayed at
Jerusalem. Joab struck Rabbah, and overthrew it. \bibleverse{2} David
took the crown of their king from off his head, and found it to weigh a
talent of gold,\footnote{\textbf{20:2} A talent is about 30 kilograms or
  66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces} and there were precious stones in it. It
was set on David's head, and he brought very much plunder out of the
city. \bibleverse{3} He brought out the people who were in it, and had
them cut with saws, with iron picks, and with axes. David did so to all
the cities of the children of Ammon. Then David and all the people
returned to Jerusalem.

\bibleverse{4} After this, war arose at Gezer with the Philistines. Then
Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai, of the sons of the giant; and
they were subdued.

\bibleverse{5} Again there was war with the Philistines; and Elhanan the
son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff
of whose spear was like a weaver's beam. \bibleverse{6} There was again
war at Gath, where there was a man of great stature, who had twenty-four
fingers and toes, six on each hand and six on each foot; and he also was
born to the giant. \bibleverse{7} When he defied Israel, Jonathan the
son of Shimea, David's brother, killed him. \bibleverse{8} These were
born to the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David and by the
hand of his servants.

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibleverse{1} Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to take a
census of Israel. \bibleverse{2} David said to Joab and to the princes
of the people, ``Go, count Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring
me word, that I may know how many there are.''

\bibleverse{3} Joab said, ``May the LORD make his people a hundred times
as many as they are. But, my lord the king, aren't they all my lord's
servants? Why does my lord require this thing? Why will he be a cause of
guilt to Israel?''

\bibleverse{4} Nevertheless the king's word prevailed against Joab.
Therefore Joab departed and went throughout all Israel, then came to
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{5} Joab gave the sum of the census of the people
to David. All those of Israel were one million one hundred thousand men
who drew a sword; and in Judah were four hundred and seventy thousand
men who drew a sword. \bibleverse{6} But he didn't count Levi and
Benjamin amongst them, for the king's word was abominable to Joab.

\bibleverse{7} God was displeased with this thing; therefore he struck
Israel. \bibleverse{8} David said to God, ``I have sinned greatly, in
that I have done this thing. But now put away, I beg you, the iniquity
of your servant, for I have done very foolishly.''

\bibleverse{9} The LORD spoke to Gad, David's seer, saying,
\bibleverse{10} ``Go and speak to David, saying, `The LORD says, ``I
offer you three things. Choose one of them, that I may do it to
you.''\,'\,''

\bibleverse{11} So Gad came to David and said to him, ``The LORD says,
`Take your choice: \bibleverse{12} either three years of famine; or
three months to be consumed before your foes, while the sword of your
enemies overtakes you; or else three days of the sword of the LORD, even
pestilence in the land, and the LORD's angel destroying throughout all
the borders of Israel. Now therefore consider what answer I shall return
to him who sent me.'\,''

\bibleverse{13} David said to Gad, ``I am in distress. Let me fall, I
pray, into the LORD's hand, for his mercies are very great. Don't let me
fall into man's hand.''

\bibleverse{14} So the LORD sent a pestilence on Israel, and seventy
thousand men of Israel fell. \bibleverse{15} God sent an angel to
Jerusalem to destroy it. As he was about to destroy, the LORD saw, and
he relented of the disaster, and said to the destroying angel, ``It is
enough. Now withdraw your hand.'' the LORD's angel was standing by the
threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. \bibleverse{16} David lifted up
his eyes, and saw the LORD's angel standing between earth and the sky,
having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem.

Then David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell on their faces.
\bibleverse{17} David said to God, ``Isn't it I who commanded the people
to be counted? It is even I who have sinned and done very wickedly; but
these sheep, what have they done? Please let your hand, O LORD my God,
be against me and against my father's house; but not against your
people, that they should be plagued.''

\bibleverse{18} Then the LORD's angel commanded Gad to tell David that
David should go up and raise an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor
of Ornan the Jebusite. \bibleverse{19} David went up at the saying of
Gad, which he spoke in the LORD's name.

\bibleverse{20} Ornan turned back and saw the angel; and his four sons
who were with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.
\bibleverse{21} As David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and
went out of the threshing floor, and bowed himself to David with his
face to the ground.

\bibleverse{22} Then David said to Ornan, ``Sell me the place of this
threshing floor, that I may build an altar to the LORD on it. You shall
sell it to me for the full price, that the plague may be stopped from
afflicting the people.''

\bibleverse{23} Ornan said to David, ``Take it for yourself, and let my
lord the king do that which is good in his eyes. Behold, I give the oxen
for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the
wheat for the meal offering. I give it all.''

\bibleverse{24} King David said to Ornan, ``No, but I will most
certainly buy it for the full price. For I will not take that which is
yours for the LORD, nor offer a burnt offering that costs me nothing.''

\bibleverse{25} So David gave to Ornan six hundred shekels\footnote{\textbf{21:25}
  A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0. 32 Troy ounces, so 600 shekels
  was about 6 kilograms or about 192 Troy ounces.} of gold by weight for
the place. \bibleverse{26} David built an altar to the LORD there, and
offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and called on the LORD; and
he answered him from the sky by fire on the altar of burnt offering.

\bibleverse{27} Then The LORD commanded the angel, and he put his sword
back into its sheath.

\bibleverse{28} At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered
him in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed
there. \bibleverse{29} For the LORD's tabernacle, which Moses made in
the wilderness, and the altar of burnt offering, were at that time in
the high place at Gibeon. \bibleverse{30} But David couldn't go before
it to enquire of God, for he was afraid because of the sword of the
LORD's angel.

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibleverse{1} Then David said, ``This is the house of the LORD God, and
this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel.''

\bibleverse{2} David gave orders to gather together the foreigners who
were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to cut dressed stones to
build God's house. \bibleverse{3} David prepared iron in abundance for
the nails for the doors of the gates and for the couplings, and bronze
in abundance without weight, \bibleverse{4} and cedar trees without
number, for the Sidonians and the people of Tyre brought cedar trees in
abundance to David. \bibleverse{5} David said, ``Solomon my son is young
and tender, and the house that is to be built for the LORD must be
exceedingly magnificent, of fame and of glory throughout all countries.
I will therefore make preparation for it.'' So David prepared abundantly
before his death. \bibleverse{6} Then he called for Solomon his son, and
commanded him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel.
\bibleverse{7} David said to Solomon his son, ``As for me, it was in my
heart to build a house to the name of the LORD my God. \bibleverse{8}
But the LORD's word came to me, saying, `You have shed blood abundantly
and have made great wars. You shall not build a house to my name,
because you have shed much blood on the earth in my sight.
\bibleverse{9} Behold, a son shall be born to you, who shall be a man of
peace. I will give him rest from all his enemies all around; for his
name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness to Israel in
his days. \bibleverse{10} He shall build a house for my name; and he
will be my son, and I will be his father; and I will establish the
throne of his kingdom over Israel forever.' \bibleverse{11} Now, my son,
may the LORD be with you and prosper you, and build the house of the
LORD your God, as he has spoken concerning you. \bibleverse{12} May the
LORD give you discretion and understanding, and put you in charge of
Israel, so that you may keep the law of the LORD your God.
\bibleverse{13} Then you will prosper, if you observe to do the statutes
and the ordinances which the LORD gave Moses concerning Israel. Be
strong and courageous. Don't be afraid and don't be dismayed.
\bibleverse{14} Now, behold, in my affliction I have prepared for the
LORD's house one hundred thousand talents\footnote{\textbf{22:14} A
  talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so
  100,000 talents is about 3 metric tonnes} of gold, one million
talents\footnote{\textbf{22:14} about 30,000 metric tonnes} of silver,
and bronze and iron without weight; for it is in abundance. I have also
prepared timber and stone; and you may add to them. \bibleverse{15}
There are also workmen with you in abundance---cutters and workers of
stone and timber, and all kinds of men who are skilful in every kind of
work; \bibleverse{16} of the gold, the silver, the bronze, and the iron,
there is no number. Arise and be doing, and may the LORD be with you.''

\bibleverse{17} David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help
Solomon his son, saying, \bibleverse{18} ``Isn't the LORD your God with
you? Hasn't he given you rest on every side? For he has delivered the
inhabitants of the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before the
LORD and before his people. \bibleverse{19} Now set your heart and your
soul to follow the LORD your God. Arise therefore, and build the
sanctuary of the LORD God, to bring the ark of the LORD's covenant and
the holy vessels of God into the house that is to be built for the
LORD's name.''

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibleverse{1} Now David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon
his son king over Israel. \bibleverse{2} He gathered together all the
princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites. \bibleverse{3} The
Levites were counted from thirty years old and upward; and their number
by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand. \bibleverse{4}
David said, ``Of these, twenty-four thousand were to oversee the work of
the LORD's house, six thousand were officers and judges, \bibleverse{5}
four thousand were doorkeepers, and four thousand praised the LORD with
the instruments which I made for giving praise.''

\bibleverse{6} David divided them into divisions according to the sons
of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

\bibleverse{7} Of the Gershonites: Ladan and Shimei. \bibleverse{8} The
sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, Zetham, and Joel, three. \bibleverse{9}
The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the
heads of the fathers' households of Ladan. \bibleverse{10} The sons of
Shimei: Jahath, Zina, Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of
Shimei. \bibleverse{11} Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second; but
Jeush and Beriah didn't have many sons; therefore they became a fathers'
house in one reckoning.

\bibleverse{12} The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel,
four. \bibleverse{13} The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; and Aaron was
separated that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons
forever, to burn incense before the LORD, to minister to him, and to
bless in his name forever. \bibleverse{14} But as for Moses the man of
God, his sons were named amongst the tribe of Levi. \bibleverse{15} The
sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer. \bibleverse{16} The sons of Gershom:
Shebuel the chief. \bibleverse{17} The son of Eliezer was Rehabiah the
chief; and Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very
many. \bibleverse{18} The son of Izhar: Shelomith the chief.
\bibleverse{19} The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the
second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. \bibleverse{20} The
sons of Uzziel: Micah the chief, and Isshiah the second.

\bibleverse{21} The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli:
Eleazar and Kish. \bibleverse{22} Eleazar died, and had no sons, but
daughters only; and their relatives, the sons of Kish, took them as
wives. \bibleverse{23} The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jeremoth,
three.

\bibleverse{24} These were the sons of Levi after their fathers' houses,
even the heads of the fathers' houses of those who were counted
individually, in the number of names by their polls, who did the work
for the service of the LORD's house, from twenty years old and upward.
\bibleverse{25} For David said, ``The LORD, the God of Israel, has given
rest to his people; and he dwells in Jerusalem forever. \bibleverse{26}
Also the Levites will no longer need to carry the tabernacle and all its
vessels for its service.'' \bibleverse{27} For by the last words of
David the sons of Levi were counted, from twenty years old and upward.
\bibleverse{28} For their duty was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the
service of the LORD's house---in the courts, in the rooms, and in the
purifying of all holy things, even the work of the service of God's
house; \bibleverse{29} for the show bread also, and for the fine flour
for a meal offering, whether of unleavened wafers, or of that which is
baked in the pan, or of that which is soaked, and for all measurements
of quantity and size; \bibleverse{30} and to stand every morning to
thank and praise the LORD, and likewise in the evening; \bibleverse{31}
and to offer all burnt offerings to the LORD on the Sabbaths, on the new
moons, and on the set feasts, in number according to the ordinance
concerning them, continually before the LORD; \bibleverse{32} and that
they should keep the duty of the Tent of Meeting, the duty of the holy
place, and the duty of the sons of Aaron their brothers for the service
of the LORD's house.

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibleverse{1} These were the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons
of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. \bibleverse{2} But Nadab
and Abihu died before their father, and had no children; therefore
Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests. \bibleverse{3} David, with Zadok
of the sons of Eleazar and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided
them according to their ordering in their service. \bibleverse{4} There
were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of
Ithamar; and they were divided like this: of the sons of Eleazar there
were sixteen, heads of fathers' houses; and of the sons of Ithamar,
according to their fathers' houses, eight. \bibleverse{5} Thus they were
divided impartially by drawing lots; for there were princes of the
sanctuary and princes of God, both of the sons of Eleazar, and of the
sons of Ithamar. \bibleverse{6} Shemaiah the son of Nethanel the scribe,
who was of the Levites, wrote them in the presence of the king, the
princes, Zadok the priest, Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and the heads
of the fathers' households of the priests and of the Levites; one
fathers' house being taken for Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.

\bibleverse{7} Now the first lot came out to Jehoiarib, the second to
Jedaiah, \bibleverse{8} the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
\bibleverse{9} the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,
\bibleverse{10} the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
\bibleverse{11} the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,
\bibleverse{12} the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,
\bibleverse{13} the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
\bibleverse{14} the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,
\bibleverse{15} the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,
\bibleverse{16} the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,
\bibleverse{17} the twenty-first to Jachin, the twenty-second to Gamul,
\bibleverse{18} the twenty-third to Delaiah, and the twenty-fourth to
Maaziah. \bibleverse{19} This was their ordering in their service, to
come into the LORD's house according to the ordinance given to them by
Aaron their father, as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded him.

\bibleverse{20} Of the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram,
Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah. \bibleverse{21} Of Rehabiah:
of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief. \bibleverse{22} Of the
Izharites, Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath. \bibleverse{23}
The sons of Hebron: Jeriah, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and
Jekameam the fourth. \bibleverse{24} The sons of Uzziel: Micah; of the
sons of Micah, Shamir. \bibleverse{25} The brother of Micah: Isshiah; of
the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah. \bibleverse{26} The sons of Merari:
Mahli and Mushi. The son of Jaaziah: Beno. \bibleverse{27} The sons of
Merari by Jaaziah: Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri. \bibleverse{28} Of
Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons. \bibleverse{29} Of Kish, the son of
Kish: Jerahmeel. \bibleverse{30} The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and
Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after their fathers'
houses. \bibleverse{31} These likewise cast lots even as their brothers
the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, Zadok, Ahimelech,
and the heads of the fathers' households of the priests and of the
Levites, the fathers' households of the chief even as those of his
younger brother.

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibleverse{1} Moreover, David and the captains of the army set apart
for the service certain of the sons of Asaph, of Heman, and of Jeduthun,
who were to prophesy with harps, with stringed instruments, and with
cymbals. The number of those who did the work according to their service
was: \bibleverse{2} of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah, and
Asharelah. The sons of Asaph were under the hand of Asaph, who
prophesied at the order of the king. \bibleverse{3} Of Jeduthun, the
sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Shimei, Hashabiah, and
Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun, who
prophesied in giving thanks and praising the LORD with the harp.
\bibleverse{4} Of Heman, the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel,
Shebuel, Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, Romamti-Ezer,
Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth. \bibleverse{5} All these
were the sons of Heman the king's seer in the words of God, to lift up
the horn. God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
\bibleverse{6} All these were under the hands of their father for song
in the LORD's house, with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps, for
the service of God's house: Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman being under the
order of the king. \bibleverse{7} The number of them, with their
brothers who were instructed in singing to the LORD, even all who were
skilful, was two hundred and eighty-eight. \bibleverse{8} They cast lots
for their offices, all alike, the small as well as the great, the
teacher as well as the student.

\bibleverse{9} Now the first lot came out for Asaph to Joseph; the
second to Gedaliah, he and his brothers and sons were twelve;
\bibleverse{10} the third to Zaccur, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
\bibleverse{11} the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
\bibleverse{12} the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brothers,
twelve; \bibleverse{13} the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brothers,
twelve; \bibleverse{14} the seventh to Jesharelah, his sons and his
brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{15} the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and
his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{16} the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons
and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{17} the tenth to Shimei, his sons
and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{18} the eleventh to Azarel, his
sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{19} the twelfth to Hashabiah,
his sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{20} for the thirteenth,
Shubael, his sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{21} for the
fourteenth, Mattithiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
\bibleverse{22} for the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his
brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{23} for the sixteenth to Hananiah, his
sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{24} for the seventeenth to
Joshbekashah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{25} for the
eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{26}
for the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
\bibleverse{27} for the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his
brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{28} for the twenty-first to Hothir, his
sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{29} for the twenty-second to
Giddalti, his sons and his brothers, twelve; \bibleverse{30} for the
twenty-third to Mahazioth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
\bibleverse{31} for the twenty-fourth to Romamti-Ezer, his sons and his
brothers, twelve.

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibleverse{1} For the divisions of the doorkeepers: of the Korahites,
Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph. \bibleverse{2}
Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second,
Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, \bibleverse{3} Elam the fifth,
Jehohanan the sixth, and Eliehoenai the seventh. \bibleverse{4}
Obed-Edom had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah
the third, Sacar the fourth, Nethanel the fifth, \bibleverse{5} Ammiel
the sixth, Issachar the seventh, and Peullethai the eighth; for God
blessed him. \bibleverse{6} Sons were also born to Shemaiah his son, who
ruled over the house of their father; for they were mighty men of
valour. \bibleverse{7} The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed, and
Elzabad, whose relatives were valiant men, Elihu, and Semachiah.
\bibleverse{8} All these were of the sons of Obed-Edom with their sons
and their brothers, able men in strength for the service: sixty-two of
Obed-Edom. \bibleverse{9} Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, eighteen
valiant men. \bibleverse{10} Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had
sons: Shimri the chief (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his
father made him chief), \bibleverse{11} Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the
third, and Zechariah the fourth. All the sons and brothers of Hosah were
thirteen.

\bibleverse{12} Of these were the divisions of the doorkeepers, even of
the chief men, having offices like their brothers, to minister in the
LORD's house. \bibleverse{13} They cast lots, the small as well as the
great, according to their fathers' houses, for every gate.
\bibleverse{14} The lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah
his son, a wise counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out
northward. \bibleverse{15} To Obed-Edom southward; and to his sons the
storehouse. \bibleverse{16} To Shuppim and Hosah westward, by the gate
of Shallecheth, at the causeway that goes up, watchman opposite
watchman. \bibleverse{17} Eastward were six Levites, northward four a
day, southward four a day, and for the storehouse two and two.
\bibleverse{18} For Parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at
Parbar. \bibleverse{19} These were the divisions of the doorkeepers; of
the sons of the Korahites, and of the sons of Merari.

\bibleverse{20} Of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of God's
house and over the treasures of the dedicated things. \bibleverse{21}
The sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, the
heads of the fathers' households belonging to Ladan the Gershonite:
Jehieli. \bibleverse{22} The sons of Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his
brother, over the treasures of the LORD's house. \bibleverse{23} Of the
Amramites, of the Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the Uzzielites:
\bibleverse{24} Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler
over the treasuries. \bibleverse{25} His brothers: of Eliezer, Rehabiah
his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son,
and Shelomoth his son. \bibleverse{26} This Shelomoth and his brothers
were over all the treasuries of the dedicated things, which David the
king, and the heads of the fathers' households, the captains over
thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the army, had dedicated.
\bibleverse{27} They dedicated some of the plunder won in battles to
repair the LORD's house. \bibleverse{28} All that Samuel the seer, Saul
the son of Kish, Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah had
dedicated, whoever had dedicated anything, it was under the hand of
Shelomoth and of his brothers.

\bibleverse{29} Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were appointed
to the outward business over Israel, for officers and judges.
\bibleverse{30} Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brothers, one
thousand and seven hundred men of valour, had the oversight of Israel
beyond the Jordan westward, for all the business of the LORD and for the
service of the king. \bibleverse{31} Of the Hebronites, Jerijah was the
chief of the Hebronites, according to their generations by fathers'
households. They were sought for in the fortieth year of the reign of
David, and mighty men of valour were found amongst them at Jazer of
Gilead. \bibleverse{32} His relatives, men of valour, were two thousand
and seven hundred, heads of fathers' households, whom king David made
overseers over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of the
Manassites, for every matter pertaining to God and for the affairs of
the king.

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibleverse{1} Now the children of Israel after their number, the heads
of fathers' households and the captains of thousands and of hundreds,
and their officers who served the king in any matter of the divisions
which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of
the year---of every division were twenty-four thousand.

\bibleverse{2} Over the first division for the first month was Jashobeam
the son of Zabdiel. In his division were twenty-four thousand.
\bibleverse{3} He was of the children of Perez, the chief of all the
captains of the army for the first month. \bibleverse{4} Over the
division of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite and his division, and
Mikloth the ruler; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
\bibleverse{5} The third captain of the army for the third month was
Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada the chief priest. In his division were
twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{6} This is that Benaiah who was the
mighty man of the thirty and over the thirty. Of his division was
Ammizabad his son. \bibleverse{7} The fourth captain for the fourth
month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him. In
his division were twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{8} The fifth captain
for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite. In his division were
twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{9} The sixth captain for the sixth
month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite. In his division were
twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{10} The seventh captain for the
seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim. In his
division were twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{11} The eighth captain
for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites. In
his division were twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{12} The ninth
captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the
Benjamites. In his division were twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{13}
The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of
the Zerahites. In his division were twenty-four thousand.
\bibleverse{14} The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah
the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim. In his division were
twenty-four thousand. \bibleverse{15} The twelfth captain for the
twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel. In his division
were twenty-four thousand.

\bibleverse{16} Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: of the
Reubenites, Eliezer the son of Zichri was the ruler; of the Simeonites,
Shephatiah the son of Maacah; \bibleverse{17} of Levi, Hashabiah the son
of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok; \bibleverse{18} of Judah, Elihu, one of the
brothers of David; of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael; \bibleverse{19}
of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jeremoth the son
of Azriel; \bibleverse{20} of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of
Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah;
\bibleverse{21} of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of
Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner; \bibleverse{22} of
Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the captains of the tribes of
Israel. \bibleverse{23} But David didn't take the number of them from
twenty years old and under, because the LORD had said he would increase
Israel like the stars of the sky. \bibleverse{24} Joab the son of
Zeruiah began to take a census, but didn't finish; and wrath came on
Israel for this. The number wasn't put into the account in the
chronicles of king David.

\bibleverse{25} Over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel.
Over the treasures in the fields, in the cities, in the villages, and in
the towers was Jonathan the son of Uzziah; \bibleverse{26} Over those
who did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son
of Chelub. \bibleverse{27} Over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite.
Over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the
Shiphmite. \bibleverse{28} Over the olive trees and the sycamore trees
that were in the lowland was Baal Hanan the Gederite. Over the cellars
of oil was Joash. \bibleverse{29} Over the herds that fed in Sharon was
Shitrai the Sharonite. Over the herds that were in the valleys was
Shaphat the son of Adlai. \bibleverse{30} Over the camels was Obil the
Ishmaelite. Over the donkeys was Jehdeiah the Meronothite. Over the
flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite. \bibleverse{31} All these were the rulers
of the property which was king David's.

\bibleverse{32} Also Jonathan, David's uncle, was a counsellor, a man of
understanding, and a scribe. Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the
king's sons. \bibleverse{33} Ahithophel was the king's counsellor.
Hushai the Archite was the king's friend. \bibleverse{34} After
Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar. Joab was the
captain of the king's army.

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibleverse{1} David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of
the tribes, the captains of the companies who served the king by
division, the captains of thousands, the captains of hundreds, and the
rulers over all the substance and possessions of the king and of his
sons, with the officers and the mighty men, even all the mighty men of
valour, to Jerusalem. \bibleverse{2} Then David the king stood up on his
feet and said, ``Hear me, my brothers and my people! As for me, it was
in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the LORD's covenant,
and for the footstool of our God; and I had prepared for the building.
\bibleverse{3} But God said to me, `You shall not build a house for my
name, because you are a man of war and have shed blood.' \bibleverse{4}
However the LORD, the God of Israel, chose me out of all the house of my
father to be king over Israel forever. For he has chosen Judah to be
prince; and in the house of Judah, the house of my father; and amongst
the sons of my father he took pleasure in me to make me king over all
Israel. \bibleverse{5} Of all my sons (for the LORD has given me many
sons), he has chosen Solomon my son to sit on the throne of the LORD's
kingdom over Israel. \bibleverse{6} He said to me, `Solomon, your son,
shall build my house and my courts; for I have chosen him to be my son,
and I will be his father. \bibleverse{7} I will establish his kingdom
forever if he continues to do my commandments and my ordinances, as it
is today.'

\bibleverse{8} Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the LORD's
assembly, and in the audience of our God, observe and seek out all the
commandments of the LORD your God, that you may possess this good land,
and leave it for an inheritance to your children after you forever.

\bibleverse{9} You, Solomon my son, know the God of your father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; for the LORD
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts. If you seek him, he will be found by you; but if you forsake
him, he will cast you off forever. \bibleverse{10} Take heed now, for
the LORD has chosen you to build a house for the sanctuary. Be strong,
and do it.''

\bibleverse{11} Then David gave to Solomon his son the plans for the
porch of the temple, for its houses, for its treasuries, for its upper
rooms, for its inner rooms, for the place of the mercy seat;
\bibleverse{12} and the plans of all that he had by the Spirit, for the
courts of the LORD's house, for all the surrounding rooms, for the
treasuries of God's house, and for the treasuries of the dedicated
things; \bibleverse{13} also for the divisions of the priests and the
Levites, for all the work of the service of the LORD's house, and for
all the vessels of service in the LORD's house--- \bibleverse{14} of
gold by weight for the gold for all vessels of every kind of service,
for all the vessels of silver by weight, for all vessels of every kind
of service; \bibleverse{15} by weight also for the lamp stands of gold,
and for its lamps, of gold, by weight for every lamp stand and for its
lamps; and for the lamp stands of silver, by weight for every lamp stand
and for its lamps, according to the use of every lamp stand;
\bibleverse{16} and the gold by weight for the tables of show bread, for
every table; and silver for the tables of silver; \bibleverse{17} and
the forks, the basins, and the cups, of pure gold; and for the golden
bowls by weight for every bowl; and for the silver bowls by weight for
every bowl; \bibleverse{18} and for the altar of incense, refined gold
by weight; and gold for the plans for the chariot, and the cherubim that
spread out and cover the ark of the LORD's covenant. \bibleverse{19}
``All this'', David said, ``I have been made to understand in writing
from the LORD's hand, even all the works of this pattern.''

\bibleverse{20} David said to Solomon his son, ``Be strong and
courageous, and do it. Don't be afraid, nor be dismayed, for the LORD
God, even my God, is with you. He will not fail you nor forsake you,
until all the work for the service of the LORD's house is finished.
\bibleverse{21} Behold, there are the divisions of the priests and the
Levites for all the service of God's house. Every willing man who has
skill for any kind of service shall be with you in all kinds of work.
Also the captains and all the people will be entirely at your command.''

\hypertarget{section-28}{%
\section{29}\label{section-28}}

\bibleverse{1} David the king said to all the assembly, ``Solomon my
son, whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work is
great; for the palace is not for man, but for the LORD God.
\bibleverse{2} Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my
God the gold for the things of gold, the silver for the things of
silver, the bronze for the things of bronze, iron for the things of
iron, and wood for the things of wood, also onyx stones, stones to be
set, stones for inlaid work of various colours, all kinds of precious
stones, and marble stones in abundance. \bibleverse{3} In addition,
because I have set my affection on the house of my God, since I have a
treasure of my own of gold and silver, I give it to the house of my God,
over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house:
\bibleverse{4} even three thousand talents of gold,\footnote{\textbf{29:4}
  A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so
  3000 talents is about 90 metric tonnes} of the gold of Ophir, and
seven thousand talents\footnote{\textbf{29:4} about 210 metric tonnes}
of refined silver, with which to overlay the walls of the houses;
\bibleverse{5} of gold for the things of gold, and of silver for the
things of silver, and for all kinds of work to be made by the hands of
artisans. Who then offers willingly to consecrate himself today to the
LORD?''

\bibleverse{6} Then the princes of the fathers' households, and the
princes of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of
hundreds, with the rulers over the king's work, offered willingly;
\bibleverse{7} and they gave for the service of God's house of gold five
thousand talents\footnote{\textbf{29:7} A talent is about 30 kilograms
  or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so 5000 talents is about 150 metric
  tonnes} and ten thousand darics,\footnote{\textbf{29:7} a daric was a
  gold coin issued by a Persian king, weighing about 8. 4 grams or about
  0. 27 troy ounces each.} of silver ten thousand talents, of bronze
eighteen thousand talents, and of iron one hundred thousand talents.
\bibleverse{8} People with whom precious stones were found gave them to
the treasure of the LORD's house, under the hand of Jehiel the
Gershonite. \bibleverse{9} Then the people rejoiced, because they
offered willingly, because with a perfect heart they offered willingly
to the LORD; and David the king also rejoiced with great joy.

\bibleverse{10} Therefore David blessed the LORD before all the
assembly; and David said, ``You are blessed, LORD, the God of Israel our
father, forever and ever. \bibleverse{11} Yours, LORD, is the greatness,
the power, the glory, the victory, and the majesty! For all that is in
the heavens and in the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, LORD, and
you are exalted as head above all. \bibleverse{12} Both riches and
honour come from you, and you rule over all! In your hand is power and
might! It is in your hand to make great, and to give strength to all!
\bibleverse{13} Now therefore, our God, we thank you and praise your
glorious name. \bibleverse{14} But who am I, and what is my people, that
we should be able to offer so willingly as this? For all things come
from you, and we have given you of your own. \bibleverse{15} For we are
strangers before you and foreigners, as all our fathers were. Our days
on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no remaining. \bibleverse{16}
LORD our God, all this store that we have prepared to build you a house
for your holy name comes from your hand, and is all your own.
\bibleverse{17} I know also, my God, that you try the heart and have
pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I
have willingly offered all these things. Now I have seen with joy your
people, who are present here, offer willingly to you. \bibleverse{18}
LORD, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep
this desire forever in the thoughts of the heart of your people, and
prepare their heart for you; \bibleverse{19} and give to Solomon my son
a perfect heart, to keep your commandments, your testimonies, and your
statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for which
I have made provision.''

\bibleverse{20} Then David said to all the assembly, ``Now bless the
LORD your God!''

All the assembly blessed the LORD, the God of their fathers, and bowed
down their heads and prostrated themselves before the LORD and the king.
\bibleverse{21} They sacrificed sacrifices to the LORD and offered burnt
offerings to the LORD on the next day after that day, even one thousand
bulls, one thousand rams, and one thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel, \bibleverse{22}
and ate and drank before the LORD on that day with great gladness. They
made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him
before the LORD to be prince, and Zadok to be priest.

\bibleverse{23} Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king
instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.
\bibleverse{24} All the princes, the mighty men, and also all of the
sons of king David submitted themselves to Solomon the king.
\bibleverse{25} The LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of
all Israel, and gave to him such royal majesty as had not been on any
king before him in Israel.

\bibleverse{26} Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
\bibleverse{27} The time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; he
reigned seven years in Hebron, and he reigned thirty-three years in
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{28} He died at a good old age, full of days,
riches, and honour; and Solomon his son reigned in his place.
\bibleverse{29} Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold,
they are written in the history of Samuel the seer, and in the history
of Nathan the prophet, and in the history of Gad the seer,
\bibleverse{30} with all his reign and his might, and the events that
involved him, Israel, and all the kingdoms of the lands.
