\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job. That
man was blameless and upright, and one who feared God,\footnote{1:1 The
  Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``אֱלֹהִ֑ים'' (Elohim).} and turned
away from evil. \bibverse{2} There were born to him seven sons and three
daughters. \bibverse{3} His possessions also were seven thousand sheep,
three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred female
donkeys, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest
of all the children of the east. \bibverse{4} His sons went and held a
feast in the house of each one on his birthday; and they sent and called
for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them. \bibverse{5} It
was so, when the days of their feasting had run their course, that Job
sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered
burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, ``It
may be that my sons have sinned, and renounced God in their hearts.''
Job did so continually.

\bibverse{6} Now on the day when God's sons came to present themselves
before the LORD,\footnote{1:6 When rendered in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS,
  ``LORD'' or ``GOD'' is the translation of God's Proper Name.} Satan
also came amongst them. \bibverse{7} The LORD said to Satan, ``Where
have you come from?''

Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, ``From going back and forth in
the earth, and from walking up and down in it.''

\bibverse{8} The LORD said to Satan, ``Have you considered my servant,
Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an
upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil.''

\bibverse{9} Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, ``Does Job fear God
for nothing? \bibverse{10} Haven't you made a hedge around him, and
around his house, and around all that he has, on every side? You have
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the
land. \bibverse{11} But stretch out your hand now, and touch all that he
has, and he will renounce you to your face.''

\bibverse{12} The LORD said to Satan, ``Behold,\footnote{1:12
  ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look at, take notice, observe, see,
  or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} all that he has is
in your power. Only on himself don't stretch out your hand.''

So Satan went out from the presence of the LORD. \bibverse{13} It fell
on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine
in their oldest brother's house, \bibverse{14} that a messenger came to
Job, and said, ``The oxen were ploughing, and the donkeys feeding beside
them, \bibverse{15} and the Sabeans attacked, and took them away. Yes,
they have killed the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone
have escaped to tell you.''

\bibverse{16} While he was still speaking, another also came and said,
``The fire of God has fallen from the sky, and has burnt up the sheep
and the servants, and consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell
you.''

\bibverse{17} While he was still speaking, another also came and said,
``The Chaldeans made three bands, and swept down on the camels, and have
taken them away, yes, and killed the servants with the edge of the
sword; and I alone have escaped to tell you.''

\bibverse{18} While he was still speaking, there came also another, and
said, ``Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in
their oldest brother's house, \bibverse{19} and behold, there came a
great wind from the wilderness, and struck the four corners of the
house, and it fell on the young men, and they are dead. I alone have
escaped to tell you.''

\bibverse{20} Then Job arose, and tore his robe, and shaved his head,
and fell down on the ground, and worshipped. \bibverse{21} He said,
``Naked I came out of my mother's womb, and naked will I return there.
The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away. Blessed be the LORD's
name.'' \bibverse{22} In all this, Job didn't sin, nor charge God with
wrongdoing.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} Again, on the day when God's sons came to present
themselves before the LORD, Satan came also amongst them to present
himself before the LORD. \bibverse{2} The LORD said to Satan, ``Where
have you come from?''

Satan answered the LORD, and said, ``From going back and forth in the
earth, and from walking up and down in it.''

\bibverse{3} The LORD said to Satan, ``Have you considered my servant
Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an
upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil. He still
maintains his integrity, although you incited me against him, to ruin
him without cause.''

\bibverse{4} Satan answered the LORD, and said, ``Skin for skin. Yes,
all that a man has he will give for his life. \bibverse{5} But stretch
out your hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
renounce you to your face.''

\bibverse{6} The LORD said to Satan, ``Behold, he is in your hand. Only
spare his life.''

\bibverse{7} So Satan went out from the presence of the LORD, and struck
Job with painful sores from the sole of his foot to his head.
\bibverse{8} He took for himself a potsherd to scrape himself with, and
he sat amongst the ashes. \bibverse{9} Then his wife said to him, ``Do
you still maintain your integrity? Renounce God, and die.''

\bibverse{10} But he said to her, ``You speak as one of the foolish
women would speak. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil?''

In all this Job didn't sin with his lips. \bibverse{11} Now when Job's
three friends heard of all this evil that had come on him, they each
came from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and
Zophar the Naamathite; and they made an appointment together to come to
sympathise with him and to comfort him. \bibverse{12} When they lifted
up their eyes from a distance, and didn't recognise him, they raised
their voices, and wept; and they each tore his robe, and sprinkled dust
on their heads towards the sky. \bibverse{13} So they sat down with him
on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to
him, for they saw that his grief was very great.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed the day of his
birth. \bibverse{2} Job answered: \bibverse{3} ``Let the day perish in
which I was born, the night which said, `There is a boy conceived.'
\bibverse{4} Let that day be darkness. Don't let God from above seek for
it, neither let the light shine on it. \bibverse{5} Let darkness and the
shadow of death claim it for their own. Let a cloud dwell on it. Let all
that makes the day black terrify it. \bibverse{6} As for that night, let
thick darkness seize on it. Let it not rejoice amongst the days of the
year. Let it not come into the number of the months. \bibverse{7}
Behold, let that night be barren. Let no joyful voice come therein.
\bibverse{8} Let them curse it who curse the day, who are ready to rouse
up leviathan. \bibverse{9} Let the stars of its twilight be dark. Let it
look for light, but have none, neither let it see the eyelids of the
morning, \bibverse{10} because it didn't shut up the doors of my
mother's womb, nor did it hide trouble from my eyes. \bibverse{11} ``Why
didn't I die from the womb? Why didn't I give up the spirit when my
mother bore me? \bibverse{12} Why did the knees receive me? Or why the
breast, that I should nurse? \bibverse{13} For now I should have lain
down and been quiet. I should have slept, then I would have been at
rest, \bibverse{14} with kings and counsellors of the earth, who built
up waste places for themselves; \bibverse{15} or with princes who had
gold, who filled their houses with silver; \bibverse{16} or as a hidden
untimely birth I had not been, as infants who never saw light.
\bibverse{17} There the wicked cease from troubling. There the weary are
at rest. \bibverse{18} There the prisoners are at ease together. They
don't hear the voice of the taskmaster. \bibverse{19} The small and the
great are there. The servant is free from his master. \bibverse{20}
``Why is light given to him who is in misery, life to the bitter in
soul, \bibverse{21} who long for death, but it doesn't come; and dig for
it more than for hidden treasures, \bibverse{22} who rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave? \bibverse{23}
Why is light given to a man whose way is hidden, whom God has hedged in?
\bibverse{24} For my sighing comes before I eat. My groanings are poured
out like water. \bibverse{25} For the thing which I fear comes on me,
that which I am afraid of comes to me. \bibverse{26} I am not at ease,
neither am I quiet, neither do I have rest; but trouble comes.''

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, \bibverse{2} ``If
someone ventures to talk with you, will you be grieved? But who can
withhold himself from speaking? \bibverse{3} Behold, you have instructed
many, you have strengthened the weak hands. \bibverse{4} Your words have
supported him who was falling, you have made the feeble knees firm.
\bibverse{5} But now it has come to you, and you faint. It touches you,
and you are troubled. \bibverse{6} Isn't your piety your confidence?
Isn't the integrity of your ways your hope? \bibverse{7} ``Remember,
now, whoever perished, being innocent? Or where were the upright cut
off? \bibverse{8} According to what I have seen, those who plough
iniquity and sow trouble, reap the same. \bibverse{9} By the breath of
God they perish. By the blast of his anger are they consumed.
\bibverse{10} The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion,
the teeth of the young lions, are broken. \bibverse{11} The old lion
perishes for lack of prey. The cubs of the lioness are scattered abroad.
\bibverse{12} ``Now a thing was secretly brought to me. My ear received
a whisper of it. \bibverse{13} In thoughts from the visions of the
night, when deep sleep falls on men, \bibverse{14} fear came on me, and
trembling, which made all my bones shake. \bibverse{15} Then a spirit
passed before my face. The hair of my flesh stood up. \bibverse{16} It
stood still, but I couldn't discern its appearance. A form was before my
eyes. Silence, then I heard a voice, saying, \bibverse{17} `Shall mortal
man be more just than God? Shall a man be more pure than his Maker?
\bibverse{18} Behold, he puts no trust in his servants. He charges his
angels with error. \bibverse{19} How much more those who dwell in houses
of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the
moth! \bibverse{20} Between morning and evening they are destroyed. They
perish forever without any regarding it. \bibverse{21} Isn't their tent
cord plucked up within them? They die, and that without wisdom.'

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} ``Call now; is there any who will answer you? To which of
the holy ones will you turn? \bibverse{2} For resentment kills the
foolish man, and jealousy kills the simple. \bibverse{3} I have seen the
foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his habitation. \bibverse{4}
His children are far from safety. They are crushed in the gate. Neither
is there any to deliver them, \bibverse{5} whose harvest the hungry eat
up, and take it even out of the thorns. The snare gapes for their
substance. \bibverse{6} For affliction doesn't come out of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground; \bibverse{7} but man is
born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward. \bibverse{8} ``But as for me,
I would seek God. I would commit my cause to God, \bibverse{9} who does
great things that can't be fathomed, marvellous things without number;
\bibverse{10} who gives rain on the earth, and sends waters on the
fields; \bibverse{11} so that he sets up on high those who are low,
those who mourn are exalted to safety. \bibverse{12} He frustrates the
plans of the crafty, so that their hands can't perform their enterprise.
\bibverse{13} He takes the wise in their own craftiness; the counsel of
the cunning is carried headlong. \bibverse{14} They meet with darkness
in the day time, and grope at noonday as in the night. \bibverse{15} But
he saves from the sword of their mouth, even the needy from the hand of
the mighty. \bibverse{16} So the poor has hope, and injustice shuts her
mouth. \bibverse{17} ``Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects.
Therefore do not despise the chastening of the Almighty. \bibverse{18}
For he wounds and binds up. He injures and his hands make whole.
\bibverse{19} He will deliver you in six troubles; yes, in seven no evil
will touch you. \bibverse{20} In famine he will redeem you from death;
in war, from the power of the sword. \bibverse{21} You will be hidden
from the scourge of the tongue, neither will you be afraid of
destruction when it comes. \bibverse{22} You will laugh at destruction
and famine, neither will you be afraid of the animals of the earth.
\bibverse{23} For you will be allied with the stones of the field. The
animals of the field will be at peace with you. \bibverse{24} You will
know that your tent is in peace. You will visit your fold, and will miss
nothing. \bibverse{25} You will know also that your offspring\footnote{5:25
  or, seed} will be great, your offspring as the grass of the earth.
\bibverse{26} You will come to your grave in a full age, like a shock of
grain comes in its season. \bibverse{27} Behold, we have researched it.
It is so. Hear it, and know it for your good.''

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``Oh that my anguish were
weighed, and all my calamity laid in the balances! \bibverse{3} For now
it would be heavier than the sand of the seas, therefore my words have
been rash. \bibverse{4} For the arrows of the Almighty are within me. My
spirit drinks up their poison. The terrors of God set themselves in
array against me. \bibverse{5} Does the wild donkey bray when he has
grass? Or does the ox low over his fodder? \bibverse{6} Can that which
has no flavour be eaten without salt? Or is there any taste in the white
of an egg? \bibverse{7} My soul refuses to touch them. They are as
loathsome food to me. \bibverse{8} ``Oh that I might have my request,
that God would grant the thing that I long for, \bibverse{9} even that
it would please God to crush me; that he would let loose his hand, and
cut me off! \bibverse{10} Let it still be my consolation, yes, let me
exult in pain that doesn't spare, that I have not denied the words of
the Holy One. \bibverse{11} What is my strength, that I should wait?
What is my end, that I should be patient? \bibverse{12} Is my strength
the strength of stones? Or is my flesh of bronze? \bibverse{13} Isn't it
that I have no help in me, that wisdom is driven away from me?
\bibverse{14} ``To him who is ready to faint, kindness should be shown
from his friend; even to him who forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
\bibverse{15} My brothers have dealt deceitfully as a brook, as the
channel of brooks that pass away; \bibverse{16} which are black by
reason of the ice, in which the snow hides itself. \bibverse{17} In the
dry season, they vanish. When it is hot, they are consumed out of their
place. \bibverse{18} The caravans that travel beside them turn away.
They go up into the waste, and perish. \bibverse{19} The caravans of
Tema looked. The companies of Sheba waited for them. \bibverse{20} They
were distressed because they were confident. They came there, and were
confounded. \bibverse{21} For now you are nothing. You see a terror, and
are afraid. \bibverse{22} Did I ever say, `Give to me?' or, `Offer a
present for me from your substance?' \bibverse{23} or, `Deliver me from
the adversary's hand?' or, `Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors?'
\bibverse{24} ``Teach me, and I will hold my peace. Cause me to
understand my error. \bibverse{25} How forcible are words of
uprightness! But your reproof, what does it reprove? \bibverse{26} Do
you intend to reprove words, since the speeches of one who is desperate
are as wind? \bibverse{27} Yes, you would even cast lots for the
fatherless, and make merchandise of your friend. \bibverse{28} Now
therefore be pleased to look at me, for surely I will not lie to your
face. \bibverse{29} Please return. Let there be no injustice. Yes,
return again. My cause is righteous. \bibverse{30} Is there injustice on
my tongue? Can't my taste discern mischievous things?

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibverse{1} ``Isn't a man forced to labour on earth? Aren't his days
like the days of a hired hand? \bibverse{2} As a servant who earnestly
desires the shadow, as a hireling who looks for his wages, \bibverse{3}
so I am made to possess months of misery, wearisome nights are appointed
to me. \bibverse{4} When I lie down, I say, `When will I arise, and the
night be gone?' I toss and turn until the dawning of the day.
\bibverse{5} My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust. My skin
closes up, and breaks out afresh. \bibverse{6} My days are swifter than
a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope. \bibverse{7} Oh remember
that my life is a breath. My eye will no more see good. \bibverse{8} The
eye of him who sees me will see me no more. Your eyes will be on me, but
I will not be. \bibverse{9} As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away,
so he who goes down to Sheol\footnote{7:9 Sheol is the place of the
  dead.} will come up no more. \bibverse{10} He will return no more to
his house, neither will his place know him any more. \bibverse{11}
``Therefore I will not keep silent. I will speak in the anguish of my
spirit. I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. \bibverse{12} Am I
a sea, or a sea monster, that you put a guard over me? \bibverse{13}
When I say, `My bed will comfort me. My couch will ease my complaint,'
\bibverse{14} then you scare me with dreams and terrify me through
visions, \bibverse{15} so that my soul chooses strangling, death rather
than my bones. \bibverse{16} I loathe my life. I don't want to live
forever. Leave me alone, for my days are but a breath. \bibverse{17}
What is man, that you should magnify him, that you should set your mind
on him, \bibverse{18} that you should visit him every morning, and test
him every moment? \bibverse{19} How long will you not look away from me,
nor leave me alone until I swallow down my spittle? \bibverse{20} If I
have sinned, what do I do to you, you watcher of men? Why have you set
me as a mark for you, so that I am a burden to myself? \bibverse{21} Why
do you not pardon my disobedience, and take away my iniquity? For now
will I lie down in the dust. You will seek me diligently, but I will not
be.''

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibverse{1} Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, \bibverse{2} ``How long
will you speak these things? Shall the words of your mouth be a mighty
wind? \bibverse{3} Does God pervert justice? Or does the Almighty
pervert righteousness? \bibverse{4} If your children have sinned against
him, he has delivered them into the hand of their disobedience.
\bibverse{5} If you want to seek God diligently, make your supplication
to the Almighty. \bibverse{6} If you were pure and upright, surely now
he would awaken for you, and make the habitation of your righteousness
prosperous. \bibverse{7} Though your beginning was small, yet your
latter end would greatly increase. \bibverse{8} ``Please enquire of past
generations. Find out about the learning of their fathers. \bibverse{9}
(For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days on
earth are a shadow.) \bibverse{10} Shall they not teach you, tell you,
and utter words out of their heart? \bibverse{11} ``Can the papyrus grow
up without mire? Can the rushes grow without water? \bibverse{12} While
it is yet in its greenness, not cut down, it withers before any other
reed. \bibverse{13} So are the paths of all who forget God. The hope of
the godless man will perish, \bibverse{14} whose confidence will break
apart, whose trust is a spider's web. \bibverse{15} He will lean on his
house, but it will not stand. He will cling to it, but it will not
endure. \bibverse{16} He is green before the sun. His shoots go out
along his garden. \bibverse{17} His roots are wrapped around the rock
pile. He sees the place of stones. \bibverse{18} If he is destroyed from
his place, then it will deny him, saying, `I have not seen you.'
\bibverse{19} Behold, this is the joy of his way. Out of the earth,
others will spring. \bibverse{20} ``Behold, God will not cast away a
blameless man, neither will he uphold the evildoers. \bibverse{21} He
will still fill your mouth with laughter, your lips with shouting.
\bibverse{22} Those who hate you will be clothed with shame. The tent of
the wicked will be no more.''

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``Truly I know that it is
so, but how can man be just with God? \bibverse{3} If he is pleased to
contend with him, he can't answer him one time in a thousand.
\bibverse{4} God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Who has
hardened himself against him and prospered? \bibverse{5} He removes the
mountains, and they don't know it, when he overturns them in his anger.
\bibverse{6} He shakes the earth out of its place. Its pillars tremble.
\bibverse{7} He commands the sun and it doesn't rise, and seals up the
stars. \bibverse{8} He alone stretches out the heavens, and treads on
the waves of the sea. \bibverse{9} He makes the Bear, Orion, and the
Pleiades, and the rooms of the south. \bibverse{10} He does great things
past finding out; yes, marvellous things without number. \bibverse{11}
Behold, he goes by me, and I don't see him. He passes on also, but I
don't perceive him. \bibverse{12} Behold, he snatches away. Who can
hinder him? Who will ask him, `What are you doing?' \bibverse{13} ``God
will not withdraw his anger. The helpers of Rahab stoop under him.
\bibverse{14} How much less will I answer him, and choose my words to
argue with him? \bibverse{15} Though I were righteous, yet I wouldn't
answer him. I would make supplication to my judge. \bibverse{16} If I
had called, and he had answered me, yet I wouldn't believe that he
listened to my voice. \bibverse{17} For he breaks me with a storm, and
multiplies my wounds without cause. \bibverse{18} He will not allow me
to catch my breath, but fills me with bitterness. \bibverse{19} If it is
a matter of strength, behold, he is mighty! If of justice, `Who,' says
he, `will summon me?' \bibverse{20} Though I am righteous, my own mouth
will condemn me. Though I am blameless, it will prove me perverse.
\bibverse{21} I am blameless. I don't respect myself. I despise my life.
\bibverse{22} ``It is all the same. Therefore I say he destroys the
blameless and the wicked. \bibverse{23} If the scourge kills suddenly,
he will mock at the trial of the innocent. \bibverse{24} The earth is
given into the hand of the wicked. He covers the faces of its judges. If
not he, then who is it? \bibverse{25} ``Now my days are swifter than a
runner. They flee away. They see no good. \bibverse{26} They have passed
away as the swift ships, as the eagle that swoops on the prey.
\bibverse{27} If I say, `I will forget my complaint, I will put off my
sad face, and cheer up,' \bibverse{28} I am afraid of all my sorrows. I
know that you will not hold me innocent. \bibverse{29} I will be
condemned. Why then do I labour in vain? \bibverse{30} If I wash myself
with snow, and cleanse my hands with lye, \bibverse{31} yet you will
plunge me in the ditch. My own clothes will abhor me. \bibverse{32} For
he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, that we should come
together in judgement. \bibverse{33} There is no umpire between us, that
might lay his hand on us both. \bibverse{34} Let him take his rod away
from me. Let his terror not make me afraid; \bibverse{35} then I would
speak, and not fear him, for I am not so in myself. \# 10 \bibverse{1}
``My soul is weary of my life. I will give free course to my complaint.
I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. \bibverse{2} I will tell God,
'Do not condemn me. Show me why you contend with me. \bibverse{3} Is it
good to you that you should oppress, that you should despise the work of
your hands, and smile on the counsel of the wicked? \bibverse{4} Do you
have eyes of flesh? Or do you see as man sees? \bibverse{5} Are your
days as the days of mortals, or your years as man's years, \bibverse{6}
that you enquire after my iniquity, and search after my sin?
\bibverse{7} Although you know that I am not wicked, there is no one who
can deliver out of your hand. \bibverse{8} ``\,'Your hands have framed
me and fashioned me altogether, yet you destroy me. \bibverse{9}
Remember, I beg you, that you have fashioned me as clay. Will you bring
me into dust again? \bibverse{10} Haven't you poured me out like milk,
and curdled me like cheese? \bibverse{11} You have clothed me with skin
and flesh, and knit me together with bones and sinews. \bibverse{12} You
have granted me life and loving kindness. Your visitation has preserved
my spirit. \bibverse{13} Yet you hid these things in your heart. I know
that this is with you: \bibverse{14} if I sin, then you mark me. You
will not acquit me from my iniquity. \bibverse{15} If I am wicked, woe
to me. If I am righteous, I still will not lift up my head, being filled
with disgrace, and conscious of my affliction. \bibverse{16} If my head
is held high, you hunt me like a lion. Again you show yourself powerful
to me. \bibverse{17} You renew your witnesses against me, and increase
your indignation on me. Changes and warfare are with me. \bibverse{18}
```Why, then, have you brought me out of the womb? I wish I had given up
the spirit, and no eye had seen me. \bibverse{19} I should have been as
though I had not been. I should have been carried from the womb to the
grave. \bibverse{20} Aren't my days few? Stop! Leave me alone, that I
may find a little comfort, \bibverse{21} before I go where I will not
return from, to the land of darkness and of the shadow of death;
\bibverse{22} the land dark as midnight, of the shadow of death, without
any order, where the light is as midnight.'\,''

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{11}\label{section-9}}

\bibverse{1} Then Zophar, the Naamathite, answered, \bibverse{2}
``Shouldn't the multitude of words be answered? Should a man full of
talk be justified? \bibverse{3} Should your boastings make men hold
their peace? When you mock, will no man make you ashamed? \bibverse{4}
For you say, `My doctrine is pure. I am clean in your eyes.'
\bibverse{5} But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against you,
\bibverse{6} that he would show you the secrets of wisdom! For true
wisdom has two sides. Know therefore that God exacts of you less than
your iniquity deserves. \bibverse{7} ``Can you fathom the mystery of
God? Or can you probe the limits of the Almighty? \bibverse{8} They are
high as heaven. What can you do? They are deeper than Sheol.\footnote{11:8
  Sheol is the place of the dead.} What can you know? \bibverse{9} Its
measure is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
\bibverse{10} If he passes by, or confines, or convenes a court, then
who can oppose him? \bibverse{11} For he knows false men. He sees
iniquity also, even though he doesn't consider it. \bibverse{12} An
empty-headed man becomes wise when a man is born as a wild donkey's
colt. \bibverse{13} ``If you set your heart aright, stretch out your
hands towards him. \bibverse{14} If iniquity is in your hand, put it far
away. Don't let unrighteousness dwell in your tents. \bibverse{15}
Surely then you will lift up your face without spot. Yes, you will be
steadfast, and will not fear, \bibverse{16} for you will forget your
misery. You will remember it like waters that have passed away.
\bibverse{17} Life will be clearer than the noonday. Though there is
darkness, it will be as the morning. \bibverse{18} You will be secure,
because there is hope. Yes, you will search, and will take your rest in
safety. \bibverse{19} Also you will lie down, and no one will make you
afraid. Yes, many will court your favour. \bibverse{20} But the eyes of
the wicked will fail. They will have no way to flee. Their hope will be
the giving up of the spirit.''

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{12}\label{section-10}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``No doubt, but you are the
people, and wisdom will die with you. \bibverse{3} But I have
understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you. Yes, who doesn't
know such things as these? \bibverse{4} I am like one who is a joke to
his neighbour, I, who called on God, and he answered. The just, the
blameless man is a joke. \bibverse{5} In the thought of him who is at
ease there is contempt for misfortune. It is ready for them whose foot
slips. \bibverse{6} The tents of robbers prosper. Those who provoke God
are secure, who carry their god in their hands. \bibverse{7} ``But ask
the animals now, and they will teach you; the birds of the sky, and they
will tell you. \bibverse{8} Or speak to the earth, and it will teach
you. The fish of the sea will declare to you. \bibverse{9} Who doesn't
know that in all these, The LORD's hand has done this, \bibverse{10} in
whose hand is the life of every living thing, and the breath of all
mankind? \bibverse{11} Doesn't the ear try words, even as the palate
tastes its food? \bibverse{12} With aged men is wisdom, in length of
days understanding. \bibverse{13} ``With God is wisdom and might. He has
counsel and understanding. \bibverse{14} Behold, he breaks down, and it
can't be built again. He imprisons a man, and there can be no release.
\bibverse{15} Behold, he withholds the waters, and they dry up. Again,
he sends them out, and they overturn the earth. \bibverse{16} With him
is strength and wisdom. The deceived and the deceiver are his.
\bibverse{17} He leads counsellors away stripped. He makes judges fools.
\bibverse{18} He loosens the bond of kings. He binds their waist with a
belt. \bibverse{19} He leads priests away stripped, and overthrows the
mighty. \bibverse{20} He removes the speech of those who are trusted,
and takes away the understanding of the elders. \bibverse{21} He pours
contempt on princes, and loosens the belt of the strong. \bibverse{22}
He uncovers deep things out of darkness, and brings out to light the
shadow of death. \bibverse{23} He increases the nations, and he destroys
them. He enlarges the nations, and he leads them captive. \bibverse{24}
He takes away understanding from the chiefs of the people of the earth,
and causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.
\bibverse{25} They grope in the dark without light. He makes them
stagger like a drunken man. \# 13 \bibverse{1} ``Behold, my eye has seen
all this. My ear has heard and understood it. \bibverse{2} What you
know, I know also. I am not inferior to you. \bibverse{3} ``Surely I
would speak to the Almighty. I desire to reason with God. \bibverse{4}
But you are forgers of lies. You are all physicians of no value.
\bibverse{5} Oh that you would be completely silent! Then you would be
wise. \bibverse{6} Hear now my reasoning. Listen to the pleadings of my
lips. \bibverse{7} Will you speak unrighteously for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? \bibverse{8} Will you show partiality to him? Will
you contend for God? \bibverse{9} Is it good that he should search you
out? Or as one deceives a man, will you deceive him? \bibverse{10} He
will surely reprove you if you secretly show partiality. \bibverse{11}
Won't his majesty make you afraid and his dread fall on you?
\bibverse{12} Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes. Your
defences are defences of clay. \bibverse{13} ``Be silent! Leave me
alone, that I may speak. Let come on me what will. \bibverse{14} Why
should I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in my hand?
\bibverse{15} Behold, he will kill me. I have no hope. Nevertheless, I
will maintain my ways before him. \bibverse{16} This also will be my
salvation, that a godless man will not come before him. \bibverse{17}
Listen carefully to my speech. Let my declaration be in your ears.
\bibverse{18} See now, I have set my cause in order. I know that I am
righteous. \bibverse{19} Who is he who will contend with me? For then
would I hold my peace and give up the spirit. \bibverse{20} ``Only don't
do two things to me, then I will not hide myself from your face:
\bibverse{21} withdraw your hand far from me, and don't let your terror
make me afraid. \bibverse{22} Then call, and I will answer, or let me
speak, and you answer me. \bibverse{23} How many are my iniquities and
sins? Make me know my disobedience and my sin. \bibverse{24} Why do you
hide your face, and consider me your enemy? \bibverse{25} Will you
harass a driven leaf? Will you pursue the dry stubble? \bibverse{26} For
you write bitter things against me, and make me inherit the iniquities
of my youth. \bibverse{27} You also put my feet in the stocks, and mark
all my paths. You set a bound to the soles of my feet, \bibverse{28}
though I am decaying like a rotten thing, like a garment that is
moth-eaten. \# 14 \bibverse{1} ``Man, who is born of a woman, is of few
days, and full of trouble. \bibverse{2} He grows up like a flower, and
is cut down. He also flees like a shadow, and doesn't continue.
\bibverse{3} Do you open your eyes on such a one, and bring me into
judgement with you? \bibverse{4} Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Not one. \bibverse{5} Seeing his days are determined, the
number of his months is with you, and you have appointed his bounds that
he can't pass. \bibverse{6} Look away from him, that he may rest, until
he accomplishes, as a hireling, his day. \bibverse{7} ``For there is
hope for a tree if it is cut down, that it will sprout again, that the
tender branch of it will not cease. \bibverse{8} Though its root grows
old in the earth, and its stock dies in the ground, \bibverse{9} yet
through the scent of water it will bud, and sprout boughs like a plant.
\bibverse{10} But man dies, and is laid low. Yes, man gives up the
spirit, and where is he? \bibverse{11} As the waters fail from the sea,
and the river wastes and dries up, \bibverse{12} so man lies down and
doesn't rise. Until the heavens are no more, they will not awake, nor be
roused out of their sleep. \bibverse{13} ``Oh that you would hide me in
Sheol,\footnote{14:13 Sheol is the place of the dead.} that you would
keep me secret until your wrath is past, that you would appoint me a set
time and remember me! \bibverse{14} If a man dies, will he live again? I
would wait all the days of my warfare, until my release should come.
\bibverse{15} You would call, and I would answer you. You would have a
desire for the work of your hands. \bibverse{16} But now you count my
steps. Don't you watch over my sin? \bibverse{17} My disobedience is
sealed up in a bag. You fasten up my iniquity. \bibverse{18} ``But the
mountain falling comes to nothing. The rock is removed out of its place.
\bibverse{19} The waters wear the stones. The torrents of it wash away
the dust of the earth. So you destroy the hope of man. \bibverse{20} You
forever prevail against him, and he departs. You change his face, and
send him away. \bibverse{21} His sons come to honour, and he doesn't
know it. They are brought low, but he doesn't perceive it of them.
\bibverse{22} But his flesh on him has pain, and his soul within him
mourns.''

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{15}\label{section-11}}

\bibverse{1} Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, \bibverse{2} ``Should a
wise man answer with vain knowledge, and fill himself with the east
wind? \bibverse{3} Should he reason with unprofitable talk, or with
speeches with which he can do no good? \bibverse{4} Yes, you do away
with fear, and hinder devotion before God. \bibverse{5} For your
iniquity teaches your mouth, and you choose the language of the crafty.
\bibverse{6} Your own mouth condemns you, and not I. Yes, your own lips
testify against you. \bibverse{7} ``Are you the first man who was born?
Or were you brought out before the hills? \bibverse{8} Have you heard
the secret counsel of God? Do you limit wisdom to yourself? \bibverse{9}
What do you know that we don't know? What do you understand which is not
in us? \bibverse{10} With us are both the grey-headed and the very aged
men, much older than your father. \bibverse{11} Are the consolations of
God too small for you, even the word that is gentle towards you?
\bibverse{12} Why does your heart carry you away? Why do your eyes
flash, \bibverse{13} that you turn your spirit against God, and let such
words go out of your mouth? \bibverse{14} What is man, that he should be
clean? What is he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
\bibverse{15} Behold, he puts no trust in his holy ones. Yes, the
heavens are not clean in his sight; \bibverse{16} how much less one who
is abominable and corrupt, a man who drinks iniquity like water!
\bibverse{17} ``I will show you, listen to me; that which I have seen I
will declare \bibverse{18} (which wise men have told by their fathers,
and have not hidden it; \bibverse{19} to whom alone the land was given,
and no stranger passed amongst them): \bibverse{20} the wicked man
writhes in pain all his days, even the number of years that are laid up
for the oppressor. \bibverse{21} A sound of terrors is in his ears. In
prosperity the destroyer will come on him. \bibverse{22} He doesn't
believe that he will return out of darkness. He is waited for by the
sword. \bibverse{23} He wanders abroad for bread, saying, `Where is it?'
He knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand. \bibverse{24}
Distress and anguish make him afraid. They prevail against him, as a
king ready to the battle. \bibverse{25} Because he has stretched out his
hand against God, and behaves himself proudly against the Almighty,
\bibverse{26} he runs at him with a stiff neck, with the thick shields
of his bucklers, \bibverse{27} because he has covered his face with his
fatness, and gathered fat on his thighs. \bibverse{28} He has lived in
desolate cities, in houses which no one inhabited, which were ready to
become heaps. \bibverse{29} He will not be rich, neither will his
substance continue, neither will their possessions be extended on the
earth. \bibverse{30} He will not depart out of darkness. The flame will
dry up his branches. He will go away by the breath of God's mouth.
\bibverse{31} Let him not trust in emptiness, deceiving himself, for
emptiness will be his reward. \bibverse{32} It will be accomplished
before his time. His branch will not be green. \bibverse{33} He will
shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and will cast off his flower as
the olive tree. \bibverse{34} For the company of the godless will be
barren, and fire will consume the tents of bribery. \bibverse{35} They
conceive mischief and produce iniquity. Their heart prepares deceit.''
\# 16 \bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``I have heard many
such things. You are all miserable comforters! \bibverse{3} Shall vain
words have an end? Or what provokes you that you answer? \bibverse{4} I
also could speak as you do. If your soul were in my soul's place, I
could join words together against you, and shake my head at you,
\bibverse{5} but I would strengthen you with my mouth. The solace of my
lips would relieve you. \bibverse{6} ``Though I speak, my grief is not
subsided. Though I forbear, what am I eased? \bibverse{7} But now, God,
you have surely worn me out. You have made all my company desolate.
\bibverse{8} You have shriveled me up. This is a witness against me. My
leanness rises up against me. It testifies to my face. \bibverse{9} He
has torn me in his wrath and persecuted me. He has gnashed on me with
his teeth. My adversary sharpens his eyes on me. \bibverse{10} They have
gaped on me with their mouth. They have struck me on the cheek
reproachfully. They gather themselves together against me. \bibverse{11}
God delivers me to the ungodly, and casts me into the hands of the
wicked. \bibverse{12} I was at ease, and he broke me apart. Yes, he has
taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces. He has also set me up for
his target. \bibverse{13} His archers surround me. He splits my kidneys
apart, and does not spare. He pours out my bile on the ground.
\bibverse{14} He breaks me with breach on breach. He runs at me like a
giant. \bibverse{15} I have sewed sackcloth on my skin, and have thrust
my horn in the dust. \bibverse{16} My face is red with weeping. Deep
darkness is on my eyelids, \bibverse{17} although there is no violence
in my hands, and my prayer is pure. \bibverse{18} ``Earth, don't cover
my blood. Let my cry have no place to rest. \bibverse{19} Even now,
behold, my witness is in heaven. He who vouches for me is on high.
\bibverse{20} My friends scoff at me. My eyes pour out tears to God,
\bibverse{21} that he would maintain the right of a man with God, of a
son of man with his neighbour! \bibverse{22} For when a few years have
come, I will go the way of no return. \# 17 \bibverse{1} ``My spirit is
consumed. My days are extinct and the grave is ready for me.
\bibverse{2} Surely there are mockers with me. My eye dwells on their
provocation. \bibverse{3} ``Now give a pledge. Be collateral for me with
yourself. Who is there who will strike hands with me? \bibverse{4} For
you have hidden their heart from understanding, therefore you will not
exalt them. \bibverse{5} He who denounces his friends for plunder, even
the eyes of his children will fail. \bibverse{6} ``But he has made me a
byword of the people. They spit in my face. \bibverse{7} My eye also is
dim by reason of sorrow. All my members are as a shadow. \bibverse{8}
Upright men will be astonished at this. The innocent will stir himself
up against the godless. \bibverse{9} Yet the righteous will hold to his
way. He who has clean hands will grow stronger and stronger.
\bibverse{10} But as for you all, come back. I will not find a wise man
amongst you. \bibverse{11} My days are past. My plans are broken off, as
are the thoughts of my heart. \bibverse{12} They change the night into
day, saying `The light is near' in the presence of darkness.
\bibverse{13} If I look for Sheol\footnote{17:13 Sheol is the place of
  the dead.} as my house, if I have spread my couch in the darkness,
\bibverse{14} if I have said to corruption, `You are my father,' and to
the worm, `My mother,' and `My sister,' \bibverse{15} where then is my
hope? As for my hope, who will see it? \bibverse{16} Shall it go down
with me to the gates of Sheol,+ 17:16 Sheol is the place of the dead. or
descend together into the dust?''

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{18}\label{section-12}}

\bibverse{1} Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, \bibverse{2} ``How long
will you hunt for words? Consider, and afterwards we will speak.
\bibverse{3} Why are we counted as animals, which have become unclean in
your sight? \bibverse{4} You who tear yourself in your anger, will the
earth be forsaken for you? Or will the rock be removed out of its place?
\bibverse{5} ``Yes, the light of the wicked will be put out. The spark
of his fire won't shine. \bibverse{6} The light will be dark in his
tent. His lamp above him will be put out. \bibverse{7} The steps of his
strength will be shortened. His own counsel will cast him down.
\bibverse{8} For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he wanders
into its mesh. \bibverse{9} A snare will take him by the heel. A trap
will catch him. \bibverse{10} A noose is hidden for him in the ground, a
trap for him on the path. \bibverse{11} Terrors will make him afraid on
every side, and will chase him at his heels. \bibverse{12} His strength
will be famished. Calamity will be ready at his side. \bibverse{13} The
members of his body will be devoured. The firstborn of death will devour
his members. \bibverse{14} He will be rooted out of the security of his
tent. He will be brought to the king of terrors. \bibverse{15} There
will dwell in his tent that which is none of his. Sulphur will be
scattered on his habitation. \bibverse{16} His roots will be dried up
beneath. His branch will be cut off above. \bibverse{17} His memory will
perish from the earth. He will have no name in the street. \bibverse{18}
He will be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.
\bibverse{19} He will have neither son nor grandson amongst his people,
nor any remaining where he lived. \bibverse{20} Those who come after
will be astonished at his day, as those who went before were frightened.
\bibverse{21} Surely such are the dwellings of the unrighteous. This is
the place of him who doesn't know God.''

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{19}\label{section-13}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``How long will you torment
me, and crush me with words? \bibverse{3} You have reproached me ten
times. You aren't ashamed that you attack me. \bibverse{4} If it is true
that I have erred, my error remains with myself. \bibverse{5} If indeed
you will magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me my
reproach, \bibverse{6} know now that God has subverted me, and has
surrounded me with his net. \bibverse{7} ``Behold, I cry out of wrong,
but I am not heard. I cry for help, but there is no justice.
\bibverse{8} He has walled up my way so that I can't pass, and has set
darkness in my paths. \bibverse{9} He has stripped me of my glory, and
taken the crown from my head. \bibverse{10} He has broken me down on
every side, and I am gone. He has plucked my hope up like a tree.
\bibverse{11} He has also kindled his wrath against me. He counts me
amongst his adversaries. \bibverse{12} His troops come on together,
build a siege ramp against me, and encamp around my tent. \bibverse{13}
``He has put my brothers far from me. My acquaintances are wholly
estranged from me. \bibverse{14} My relatives have gone away. My
familiar friends have forgotten me. \bibverse{15} Those who dwell in my
house and my maids consider me a stranger. I am an alien in their sight.
\bibverse{16} I call to my servant, and he gives me no answer. I beg him
with my mouth. \bibverse{17} My breath is offensive to my wife. I am
loathsome to the children of my own mother. \bibverse{18} Even young
children despise me. If I arise, they speak against me. \bibverse{19}
All my familiar friends abhor me. They whom I loved have turned against
me. \bibverse{20} My bones stick to my skin and to my flesh. I have
escaped by the skin of my teeth. \bibverse{21} ``Have pity on me. Have
pity on me, you my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
\bibverse{22} Why do you persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with
my flesh? \bibverse{23} ``Oh that my words were now written! Oh that
they were inscribed in a book! \bibverse{24} That with an iron pen and
lead they were engraved in the rock forever! \bibverse{25} But as for
me, I know that my Redeemer lives. In the end, he will stand upon the
earth. \bibverse{26} After my skin is destroyed, then I will see God in
my flesh, \bibverse{27} whom I, even I, will see on my side. My eyes
will see, and not as a stranger. ``My heart is consumed within me.
\bibverse{28} If you say, `How we will persecute him!' because the root
of the matter is found in me, \bibverse{29} be afraid of the sword, for
wrath brings the punishments of the sword, that you may know there is a
judgement.''

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{20}\label{section-14}}

\bibverse{1} Then Zophar the Naamathite answered, \bibverse{2}
``Therefore my thoughts answer me, even by reason of my haste that is in
me. \bibverse{3} I have heard the reproof which puts me to shame. The
spirit of my understanding answers me. \bibverse{4} Don't you know this
from old time, since man was placed on earth, \bibverse{5} that the
triumphing of the wicked is short, the joy of the godless but for a
moment? \bibverse{6} Though his height mount up to the heavens, and his
head reach to the clouds, \bibverse{7} yet he will perish forever like
his own dung. Those who have seen him will say, `Where is he?'
\bibverse{8} He will fly away as a dream, and will not be found. Yes, he
will be chased away like a vision of the night. \bibverse{9} The eye
which saw him will see him no more, neither will his place see him any
more. \bibverse{10} His children will seek the favour of the poor. His
hands will give back his wealth. \bibverse{11} His bones are full of his
youth, but youth will lie down with him in the dust. \bibverse{12}
``Though wickedness is sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his
tongue, \bibverse{13} though he spare it, and will not let it go, but
keep it still within his mouth, \bibverse{14} yet his food in his bowels
is turned. It is cobra venom within him. \bibverse{15} He has swallowed
down riches, and he will vomit them up again. God will cast them out of
his belly. \bibverse{16} He will suck cobra venom. The viper's tongue
will kill him. \bibverse{17} He will not look at the rivers, the flowing
streams of honey and butter. \bibverse{18} He will restore that for
which he laboured, and will not swallow it down. He will not rejoice
according to the substance that he has gotten. \bibverse{19} For he has
oppressed and forsaken the poor. He has violently taken away a house,
and he will not build it up. \bibverse{20} ``Because he knew no
quietness within him, he will not save anything of that in which he
delights. \bibverse{21} There was nothing left that he didn't devour,
therefore his prosperity will not endure. \bibverse{22} In the fullness
of his sufficiency, distress will overtake him. The hand of everyone who
is in misery will come on him. \bibverse{23} When he is about to fill
his belly, God will cast the fierceness of his wrath on him. It will
rain on him while he is eating. \bibverse{24} He will flee from the iron
weapon. The bronze arrow will strike him through. \bibverse{25} He draws
it out, and it comes out of his body. Yes, the glittering point comes
out of his liver. Terrors are on him. \bibverse{26} All darkness is laid
up for his treasures. An unfanned fire will devour him. It will consume
that which is left in his tent. \bibverse{27} The heavens will reveal
his iniquity. The earth will rise up against him. \bibverse{28} The
increase of his house will depart. They will rush away in the day of his
wrath. \bibverse{29} This is the portion of a wicked man from God, the
heritage appointed to him by God.''

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{21}\label{section-15}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``Listen diligently to my
speech. Let this be your consolation. \bibverse{3} Allow me, and I also
will speak. After I have spoken, mock on. \bibverse{4} As for me, is my
complaint to man? Why shouldn't I be impatient? \bibverse{5} Look at me,
and be astonished. Lay your hand on your mouth. \bibverse{6} When I
remember, I am troubled. Horror takes hold of my flesh. \bibverse{7}
``Why do the wicked live, become old, yes, and grow mighty in power?
\bibverse{8} Their child is established with them in their sight, their
offspring before their eyes. \bibverse{9} Their houses are safe from
fear, neither is the rod of God upon them. \bibverse{10} Their bulls
breed without fail. Their cows calve, and don't miscarry. \bibverse{11}
They send out their little ones like a flock. Their children dance.
\bibverse{12} They sing to the tambourine and harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the pipe. \bibverse{13} They spend their days in prosperity. In
an instant they go down to Sheol.\footnote{21:13 Sheol is the place of
  the dead.} \bibverse{14} They tell God, `Depart from us, for we don't
want to know about your ways. \bibverse{15} What is the Almighty, that
we should serve him? What profit should we have, if we pray to him?'
\bibverse{16} Behold, their prosperity is not in their hand. The counsel
of the wicked is far from me. \bibverse{17} ``How often is it that the
lamp of the wicked is put out, that their calamity comes on them, that
God distributes sorrows in his anger? \bibverse{18} How often is it that
they are as stubble before the wind, as chaff that the storm carries
away? \bibverse{19} You say, `God lays up his iniquity for his
children.' Let him recompense it to himself, that he may know it.
\bibverse{20} Let his own eyes see his destruction. Let him drink of the
wrath of the Almighty. \bibverse{21} For what does he care for his house
after him, when the number of his months is cut off? \bibverse{22}
``Shall any teach God knowledge, since he judges those who are high?
\bibverse{23} One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and
quiet. \bibverse{24} His pails are full of milk. The marrow of his bones
is moistened. \bibverse{25} Another dies in bitterness of soul, and
never tastes of good. \bibverse{26} They lie down alike in the dust. The
worm covers them. \bibverse{27} ``Behold, I know your thoughts, the
plans with which you would wrong me. \bibverse{28} For you say, `Where
is the house of the prince? Where is the tent in which the wicked
lived?' \bibverse{29} Haven't you asked wayfaring men? Don't you know
their evidences, \bibverse{30} that the evil man is reserved to the day
of calamity, that they are led out to the day of wrath? \bibverse{31}
Who will declare his way to his face? Who will repay him what he has
done? \bibverse{32} Yet he will be borne to the grave. Men will keep
watch over the tomb. \bibverse{33} The clods of the valley will be sweet
to him. All men will draw after him, as there were innumerable before
him. \bibverse{34} So how can you comfort me with nonsense, because in
your answers there remains only falsehood?''

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{22}\label{section-16}}

\bibverse{1} Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, \bibverse{2} ``Can a
man be profitable to God? Surely he who is wise is profitable to
himself. \bibverse{3} Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that you are
righteous? Or does it benefit him that you make your ways perfect?
\bibverse{4} Is it for your piety that he reproves you, that he enters
with you into judgement? \bibverse{5} Isn't your wickedness great?
Neither is there any end to your iniquities. \bibverse{6} For you have
taken pledges from your brother for nothing, and stripped the naked of
their clothing. \bibverse{7} You haven't given water to the weary to
drink, and you have withheld bread from the hungry. \bibverse{8} But as
for the mighty man, he had the earth. The honourable man, he lived in
it. \bibverse{9} You have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the
fatherless have been broken. \bibverse{10} Therefore snares are around
you. Sudden fear troubles you, \bibverse{11} or darkness, so that you
can not see, and floods of waters cover you. \bibverse{12} ``Isn't God
in the heights of heaven? See the height of the stars, how high they
are! \bibverse{13} You say, `What does God know? Can he judge through
the thick darkness? \bibverse{14} Thick clouds are a covering to him, so
that he doesn't see. He walks on the vault of the sky.' \bibverse{15}
Will you keep the old way, which wicked men have trodden, \bibverse{16}
who were snatched away before their time, whose foundation was poured
out as a stream, \bibverse{17} who said to God, `Depart from us!' and,
`What can the Almighty do for us?' \bibverse{18} Yet he filled their
houses with good things, but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
\bibverse{19} The righteous see it, and are glad. The innocent ridicule
them, \bibverse{20} saying, `Surely those who rose up against us are cut
off. The fire has consumed their remnant.' \bibverse{21} ``Acquaint
yourself with him now, and be at peace. By it, good will come to you.
\bibverse{22} Please receive instruction from his mouth, and lay up his
words in your heart. \bibverse{23} If you return to the Almighty, you
will be built up, if you put away unrighteousness far from your tents.
\bibverse{24} Lay your treasure in the dust, the gold of Ophir amongst
the stones of the brooks. \bibverse{25} The Almighty will be your
treasure, and precious silver to you. \bibverse{26} For then you will
delight yourself in the Almighty, and will lift up your face to God.
\bibverse{27} You will make your prayer to him, and he will hear you.
You will pay your vows. \bibverse{28} You will also decree a thing, and
it will be established to you. Light will shine on your ways.
\bibverse{29} When they cast down, you will say, `be lifted up.' He will
save the humble person. \bibverse{30} He will even deliver him who is
not innocent. Yes, he will be delivered through the cleanness of your
hands.''

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{23}\label{section-17}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``Even today my complaint
is rebellious. His hand is heavy in spite of my groaning. \bibverse{3}
Oh that I knew where I might find him! That I might come even to his
seat! \bibverse{4} I would set my cause in order before him, and fill my
mouth with arguments. \bibverse{5} I would know the words which he would
answer me, and understand what he would tell me. \bibverse{6} Would he
contend with me in the greatness of his power? No, but he would listen
to me. \bibverse{7} There the upright might reason with him, so I should
be delivered forever from my judge. \bibverse{8} ``If I go east, he is
not there. If I go west, I can't find him. \bibverse{9} He works to the
north, but I can't see him. He turns south, but I can't catch a glimpse
of him. \bibverse{10} But he knows the way that I take. When he has
tried me, I will come out like gold. \bibverse{11} My foot has held fast
to his steps. I have kept his way, and not turned away. \bibverse{12} I
haven't gone back from the commandment of his lips. I have treasured up
the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. \bibverse{13} But he
stands alone, and who can oppose him? What his soul desires, even that
he does. \bibverse{14} For he performs that which is appointed for me.
Many such things are with him. \bibverse{15} Therefore I am terrified at
his presence. When I consider, I am afraid of him. \bibverse{16} For God
has made my heart faint. The Almighty has terrified me. \bibverse{17}
Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither did he cover the
thick darkness from my face. \# 24 \bibverse{1} ``Why aren't times laid
up by the Almighty? Why don't those who know him see his days?
\bibverse{2} There are people who remove the landmarks. They violently
take away flocks, and feed them. \bibverse{3} They drive away the donkey
of the fatherless, and they take the widow's ox for a pledge.
\bibverse{4} They turn the needy out of the way. The poor of the earth
all hide themselves. \bibverse{5} Behold, as wild donkeys in the desert,
they go out to their work, seeking diligently for food. The wilderness
yields them bread for their children. \bibverse{6} They cut their food
in the field. They glean the vineyard of the wicked. \bibverse{7} They
lie all night naked without clothing, and have no covering in the cold.
\bibverse{8} They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace
the rock for lack of a shelter. \bibverse{9} There are those who pluck
the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor,
\bibverse{10} so that they go around naked without clothing. Being
hungry, they carry the sheaves. \bibverse{11} They make oil within the
walls of these men. They tread wine presses, and suffer thirst.
\bibverse{12} From out of the populous city, men groan. The soul of the
wounded cries out, yet God doesn't regard the folly. \bibverse{13}
``These are of those who rebel against the light. They don't know its
ways, nor stay in its paths. \bibverse{14} The murderer rises with the
light. He kills the poor and needy. In the night he is like a thief.
\bibverse{15} The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight,
saying, `No eye will see me.' He disguises his face. \bibverse{16} In
the dark they dig through houses. They shut themselves up in the
daytime. They don't know the light. \bibverse{17} For the morning is to
all of them like thick darkness, for they know the terrors of the thick
darkness. \bibverse{18} ``They are foam on the surface of the waters.
Their portion is cursed in the earth. They don't turn into the way of
the vineyards. \bibverse{19} Drought and heat consume the snow waters,
so does Sheol\footnote{24:19 Sheol is the place of the dead.} those who
have sinned. \bibverse{20} The womb will forget him. The worm will feed
sweetly on him. He will be no more remembered. Unrighteousness will be
broken as a tree. \bibverse{21} He devours the barren who don't bear. He
shows no kindness to the widow. \bibverse{22} Yet God preserves the
mighty by his power. He rises up who has no assurance of life.
\bibverse{23} God gives them security, and they rest in it. His eyes are
on their ways. \bibverse{24} They are exalted; yet a little while, and
they are gone. Yes, they are brought low, they are taken out of the way
as all others, and are cut off as the tops of the ears of grain.
\bibverse{25} If it isn't so now, who will prove me a liar, and make my
speech worth nothing?''

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{25}\label{section-18}}

\bibverse{1} Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, \bibverse{2} ``Dominion
and fear are with him. He makes peace in his high places. \bibverse{3}
Can his armies be counted? On whom does his light not arise?
\bibverse{4} How then can man be just with God? Or how can he who is
born of a woman be clean? \bibverse{5} Behold, even the moon has no
brightness, and the stars are not pure in his sight; \bibverse{6} How
much less man, who is a worm, and the son of man, who is a worm!''

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{26}\label{section-19}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered, \bibverse{2} ``How have you helped him
who is without power! How have you saved the arm that has no strength!
\bibverse{3} How have you counselled him who has no wisdom, and
plentifully declared sound knowledge! \bibverse{4} To whom have you
uttered words? Whose spirit came out of you? \bibverse{5} ``The departed
spirits tremble, those beneath the waters and all that live in them.
\bibverse{6} Sheol\footnote{26:6 Sheol is the place of the dead.} is
naked before God, and Abaddon+ 26:6 Abaddon means Destroyer. has no
covering. \bibverse{7} He stretches out the north over empty space, and
hangs the earth on nothing. \bibverse{8} He binds up the waters in his
thick clouds, and the cloud is not burst under them. \bibverse{9} He
encloses the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud on it.
\bibverse{10} He has described a boundary on the surface of the waters,
and to the confines of light and darkness. \bibverse{11} The pillars of
heaven tremble and are astonished at his rebuke. \bibverse{12} He stirs
up the sea with his power, and by his understanding he strikes through
Rahab. \bibverse{13} By his Spirit the heavens are garnished. His hand
has pierced the swift serpent. \bibverse{14} Behold, these are but the
outskirts of his ways. How small a whisper do we hear of him! But the
thunder of his power who can understand?''

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{27}\label{section-20}}

\bibverse{1} Job again took up his parable, and said, \bibverse{2} ``As
God lives, who has taken away my right, the Almighty, who has made my
soul bitter \bibverse{3} (for the length of my life is still in me, and
the spirit of God is in my nostrils); \bibverse{4} surely my lips will
not speak unrighteousness, neither will my tongue utter deceit.
\bibverse{5} Far be it from me that I should justify you. Until I die I
will not put away my integrity from me. \bibverse{6} I hold fast to my
righteousness, and will not let it go. My heart will not reproach me so
long as I live. \bibverse{7} ``Let my enemy be as the wicked. Let him
who rises up against me be as the unrighteous. \bibverse{8} For what is
the hope of the godless, when he is cut off, when God takes away his
life? \bibverse{9} Will God hear his cry when trouble comes on him?
\bibverse{10} Will he delight himself in the Almighty, and call on God
at all times? \bibverse{11} I will teach you about the hand of God. I
will not conceal that which is with the Almighty. \bibverse{12} Behold,
all of you have seen it yourselves; why then have you become altogether
vain? \bibverse{13} ``This is the portion of a wicked man with God, the
heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the Almighty.
\bibverse{14} If his children are multiplied, it is for the sword. His
offspring will not be satisfied with bread. \bibverse{15} Those who
remain of him will be buried in death. His widows will make no
lamentation. \bibverse{16} Though he heap up silver as the dust, and
prepare clothing as the clay; \bibverse{17} he may prepare it, but the
just will put it on, and the innocent will divide the silver.
\bibverse{18} He builds his house as the moth, as a booth which the
watchman makes. \bibverse{19} He lies down rich, but he will not do so
again. He opens his eyes, and he is not. \bibverse{20} Terrors overtake
him like waters. A storm steals him away in the night. \bibverse{21} The
east wind carries him away, and he departs. It sweeps him out of his
place. \bibverse{22} For it hurls at him, and does not spare, as he
flees away from his hand. \bibverse{23} Men will clap their hands at
him, and will hiss him out of his place. \# 28 \bibverse{1} ``Surely
there is a mine for silver, and a place for gold which they refine.
\bibverse{2} Iron is taken out of the earth, and copper is smelted out
of the ore. \bibverse{3} Man sets an end to darkness, and searches out,
to the furthest bound, the stones of obscurity and of thick darkness.
\bibverse{4} He breaks open a shaft away from where people live. They
are forgotten by the foot. They hang far from men, they swing back and
forth. \bibverse{5} As for the earth, out of it comes bread. Underneath
it is turned up as it were by fire. \bibverse{6} Sapphires come from its
rocks. It has dust of gold. \bibverse{7} That path no bird of prey
knows, neither has the falcon's eye seen it. \bibverse{8} The proud
animals have not trodden it, nor has the fierce lion passed by there.
\bibverse{9} He puts his hand on the flinty rock, and he overturns the
mountains by the roots. \bibverse{10} He cuts out channels amongst the
rocks. His eye sees every precious thing. \bibverse{11} He binds the
streams that they don't trickle. The thing that is hidden he brings out
to light. \bibverse{12} ``But where will wisdom be found? Where is the
place of understanding? \bibverse{13} Man doesn't know its price, and it
isn't found in the land of the living. \bibverse{14} The deep says, `It
isn't in me.' The sea says, `It isn't with me.' \bibverse{15} It can't
be gotten for gold, neither will silver be weighed for its price.
\bibverse{16} It can't be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the
precious onyx, or the sapphire.\footnote{28:16 or, lapis lazuli}
\bibverse{17} Gold and glass can't equal it, neither will it be
exchanged for jewels of fine gold. \bibverse{18} No mention will be made
of coral or of crystal. Yes, the price of wisdom is above rubies.
\bibverse{19} The topaz of Ethiopia will not equal it. It won't be
valued with pure gold. \bibverse{20} Where then does wisdom come from?
Where is the place of understanding? \bibverse{21} Seeing it is hidden
from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the birds of the sky.
\bibverse{22} Destruction and Death say, `We have heard a rumour of it
with our ears.' \bibverse{23} ``God understands its way, and he knows
its place. \bibverse{24} For he looks to the ends of the earth, and sees
under the whole sky. \bibverse{25} He establishes the force of the wind.
Yes, he measures out the waters by measure. \bibverse{26} When he made a
decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder,
\bibverse{27} then he saw it, and declared it. He established it, yes,
and searched it out. \bibverse{28} To man he said, `Behold, the fear of
the Lord,+ 28:28 The word translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.'' that is
wisdom. To depart from evil is understanding.'\,''

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{29}\label{section-21}}

\bibverse{1} Job again took up his parable, and said, \bibverse{2} ``Oh
that I were as in the months of old, as in the days when God watched
over me; \bibverse{3} when his lamp shone on my head, and by his light I
walked through darkness, \bibverse{4} as I was in my prime, when the
friendship of God was in my tent, \bibverse{5} when the Almighty was yet
with me, and my children were around me, \bibverse{6} when my steps were
washed with butter, and the rock poured out streams of oil for me,
\bibverse{7} when I went out to the city gate, when I prepared my seat
in the street. \bibverse{8} The young men saw me and hid themselves. The
aged rose up and stood. \bibverse{9} The princes refrained from talking,
and laid their hand on their mouth. \bibverse{10} The voice of the
nobles was hushed, and their tongue stuck to the roof of their mouth.
\bibverse{11} For when the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and when
the eye saw me, it commended me, \bibverse{12} because I delivered the
poor who cried, and the fatherless also, who had no one to help him,
\bibverse{13} the blessing of him who was ready to perish came on me,
and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. \bibverse{14} I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me. My justice was as a robe and a diadem.
\bibverse{15} I was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame.
\bibverse{16} I was a father to the needy. I researched the cause of him
whom I didn't know. \bibverse{17} I broke the jaws of the unrighteous
and plucked the prey out of his teeth. \bibverse{18} Then I said, `I
will die in my own house, I will count my days as the sand.
\bibverse{19} My root is spread out to the waters. The dew lies all
night on my branch. \bibverse{20} My glory is fresh in me. My bow is
renewed in my hand.' \bibverse{21} ``Men listened to me, waited, and
kept silence for my counsel. \bibverse{22} After my words they didn't
speak again. My speech fell on them. \bibverse{23} They waited for me as
for the rain. Their mouths drank as with the spring rain. \bibverse{24}
I smiled on them when they had no confidence. They didn't reject the
light of my face. \bibverse{25} I chose out their way, and sat as chief.
I lived as a king in the army, as one who comforts the mourners. \# 30
\bibverse{1} ``But now those who are younger than I have me in derision,
whose fathers I considered unworthy to put with my sheep dogs.
\bibverse{2} Of what use is the strength of their hands to me, men in
whom ripe age has perished? \bibverse{3} They are gaunt from lack and
famine. They gnaw the dry ground, in the gloom of waste and desolation.
\bibverse{4} They pluck salt herbs by the bushes. The roots of the broom
tree are their food. \bibverse{5} They are driven out from amongst men.
They cry after them as after a thief, \bibverse{6} so that they live in
frightful valleys, and in holes of the earth and of the rocks.
\bibverse{7} They bray amongst the bushes. They are gathered together
under the nettles. \bibverse{8} They are children of fools, yes,
children of wicked men. They were flogged out of the land. \bibverse{9}
``Now I have become their song. Yes, I am a byword to them.
\bibverse{10} They abhor me, they stand aloof from me, and don't
hesitate to spit in my face. \bibverse{11} For he has untied his cord,
and afflicted me; and they have thrown off restraint before me.
\bibverse{12} On my right hand rise the rabble. They thrust aside my
feet. They cast their ways of destruction up against me. \bibverse{13}
They mar my path. They promote my destruction without anyone's help.
\bibverse{14} As through a wide breach they come. They roll themselves
in amid the ruin. \bibverse{15} Terrors have turned on me. They chase my
honour as the wind. My welfare has passed away as a cloud. \bibverse{16}
``Now my soul is poured out within me. Days of affliction have taken
hold of me. \bibverse{17} In the night season my bones are pierced in
me, and the pains that gnaw me take no rest. \bibverse{18} My garment is
disfigured by great force. It binds me about as the collar of my tunic.
\bibverse{19} He has cast me into the mire. I have become like dust and
ashes. \bibverse{20} I cry to you, and you do not answer me. I stand up,
and you gaze at me. \bibverse{21} You have turned to be cruel to me.
With the might of your hand you persecute me. \bibverse{22} You lift me
up to the wind, and drive me with it. You dissolve me in the storm.
\bibverse{23} For I know that you will bring me to death, to the house
appointed for all living. \bibverse{24} ``However doesn't one stretch
out a hand in his fall? Or in his calamity therefore cry for help?
\bibverse{25} Didn't I weep for him who was in trouble? Wasn't my soul
grieved for the needy? \bibverse{26} When I looked for good, then evil
came. When I waited for light, darkness came. \bibverse{27} My heart is
troubled, and doesn't rest. Days of affliction have come on me.
\bibverse{28} I go mourning without the sun. I stand up in the assembly,
and cry for help. \bibverse{29} I am a brother to jackals, and a
companion to ostriches. \bibverse{30} My skin grows black and peels from
me. My bones are burnt with heat. \bibverse{31} Therefore my harp has
turned to mourning, and my pipe into the voice of those who weep. \# 31
\bibverse{1} ``I made a covenant with my eyes; how then should I look
lustfully at a young woman? \bibverse{2} For what is the portion from
God above, and the heritage from the Almighty on high? \bibverse{3} Is
it not calamity to the unrighteous, and disaster to the workers of
iniquity? \bibverse{4} Doesn't he see my ways, and count all my steps?
\bibverse{5} ``If I have walked with falsehood, and my foot has hurried
to deceit \bibverse{6} (let me be weighed in an even balance, that God
may know my integrity); \bibverse{7} if my step has turned out of the
way, if my heart walked after my eyes, if any defilement has stuck to my
hands, \bibverse{8} then let me sow, and let another eat. Yes, let the
produce of my field be rooted out. \bibverse{9} ``If my heart has been
enticed to a woman, and I have laid wait at my neighbour's door,
\bibverse{10} then let my wife grind for another, and let others sleep
with her. \bibverse{11} For that would be a heinous crime. Yes, it would
be an iniquity to be punished by the judges, \bibverse{12} for it is a
fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all my increase.
\bibverse{13} ``If I have despised the cause of my male servant or of my
female servant, when they contended with me, \bibverse{14} what then
will I do when God rises up? When he visits, what will I answer him?
\bibverse{15} Didn't he who made me in the womb make him? Didn't one
fashion us in the womb? \bibverse{16} ``If I have withheld the poor from
their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail,
\bibverse{17} or have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless has not
eaten of it \bibverse{18} (no, from my youth he grew up with me as with
a father, I have guided her from my mother's womb); \bibverse{19} if I
have seen any perish for want of clothing, or that the needy had no
covering; \bibverse{20} if his heart hasn't blessed me, if he hasn't
been warmed with my sheep's fleece; \bibverse{21} if I have lifted up my
hand against the fatherless, because I saw my help in the gate;
\bibverse{22} then let my shoulder fall from the shoulder blade, and my
arm be broken from the bone. \bibverse{23} For calamity from God is a
terror to me. Because of his majesty, I can do nothing. \bibverse{24}
``If I have made gold my hope, and have said to the fine gold, `You are
my confidence;' \bibverse{25} If I have rejoiced because my wealth was
great, and because my hand had gotten much; \bibverse{26} if I have seen
the sun when it shined, or the moon moving in splendour, \bibverse{27}
and my heart has been secretly enticed, and my hand threw a kiss from my
mouth; \bibverse{28} this also would be an iniquity to be punished by
the judges, for I should have denied the God who is above. \bibverse{29}
``If I have rejoiced at the destruction of him who hated me, or lifted
up myself when evil found him \bibverse{30} (I have certainly not
allowed my mouth to sin by asking his life with a curse); \bibverse{31}
if the men of my tent have not said, `Who can find one who has not been
filled with his meat?' \bibverse{32} (the foreigner has not camped in
the street, but I have opened my doors to the traveller); \bibverse{33}
if like Adam I have covered my transgressions, by hiding my iniquity in
my heart, \bibverse{34} because I feared the great multitude, and the
contempt of families terrified me, so that I kept silence, and didn't go
out of the door--- \bibverse{35} oh that I had one to hear me! Behold,
here is my signature! Let the Almighty answer me! Let the accuser write
my indictment! \bibverse{36} Surely I would carry it on my shoulder, and
I would bind it to me as a crown. \bibverse{37} I would declare to him
the number of my steps. I would go near to him like a prince.
\bibverse{38} If my land cries out against me, and its furrows weep
together; \bibverse{39} if I have eaten its fruits without money, or
have caused its owners to lose their life, \bibverse{40} let briers grow
instead of wheat, and stinkweed instead of barley.'' The words of Job
are ended.

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{32}\label{section-22}}

\bibverse{1} So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was
righteous in his own eyes. \bibverse{2} Then the wrath of Elihu the son
of Barachel, the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was kindled against Job.
His wrath was kindled because he justified himself rather than God.
\bibverse{3} Also his wrath was kindled against his three friends,
because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
\bibverse{4} Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job, because they were
elder than he. \bibverse{5} When Elihu saw that there was no answer in
the mouth of these three men, his wrath was kindled. \bibverse{6} Elihu
the son of Barachel the Buzite answered, ``I am young, and you are very
old. Therefore I held back, and didn't dare show you my opinion.
\bibverse{7} I said, `Days should speak, and multitude of years should
teach wisdom.' \bibverse{8} But there is a spirit in man, and the
Spirit\footnote{32:8 or, breath} of the Almighty gives them
understanding. \bibverse{9} It is not the great who are wise, nor the
aged who understand justice. \bibverse{10} Therefore I said, `Listen to
me; I also will show my opinion.' \bibverse{11} ``Behold, I waited for
your words, and I listened for your reasoning, while you searched out
what to say. \bibverse{12} Yes, I gave you my full attention, but there
was no one who convinced Job, or who answered his words, amongst you.
\bibverse{13} Beware lest you say, `We have found wisdom. God may refute
him, not man;' \bibverse{14} for he has not directed his words against
me; neither will I answer him with your speeches. \bibverse{15} ``They
are amazed. They answer no more. They don't have a word to say.
\bibverse{16} Shall I wait, because they don't speak, because they stand
still, and answer no more? \bibverse{17} I also will answer my part, and
I also will show my opinion. \bibverse{18} For I am full of words. The
spirit within me constrains me. \bibverse{19} Behold, my breast is as
wine which has no vent; like new wineskins it is ready to burst.
\bibverse{20} I will speak, that I may be refreshed. I will open my lips
and answer. \bibverse{21} Please don't let me respect any man's person,
neither will I give flattering titles to any man. \bibverse{22} For I
don't know how to give flattering titles, or else my Maker would soon
take me away.

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{33}\label{section-23}}

\bibverse{1} ``However, Job, please hear my speech, and listen to all my
words. \bibverse{2} See now, I have opened my mouth. My tongue has
spoken in my mouth. \bibverse{3} My words will utter the uprightness of
my heart. That which my lips know they will speak sincerely.
\bibverse{4} The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty gives me life. \bibverse{5} If you can, answer me. Set your
words in order before me, and stand up. \bibverse{6} Behold, I am
towards God even as you are. I am also formed out of the clay.
\bibverse{7} Behold, my terror will not make you afraid, neither will my
pressure be heavy on you. \bibverse{8} ``Surely you have spoken in my
hearing, I have heard the voice of your words, saying, \bibverse{9} `I
am clean, without disobedience. I am innocent, neither is there iniquity
in me. \bibverse{10} Behold, he finds occasions against me. He counts me
for his enemy. \bibverse{11} He puts my feet in the stocks. He marks all
my paths.' \bibverse{12} ``Behold, I will answer you. In this you are
not just, for God is greater than man. \bibverse{13} Why do you strive
against him, because he doesn't give account of any of his matters?
\bibverse{14} For God speaks once, yes twice, though man pays no
attention. \bibverse{15} In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep
sleep falls on men, in slumbering on the bed, \bibverse{16} then he
opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, \bibverse{17} that
he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.
\bibverse{18} He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from
perishing by the sword. \bibverse{19} ``He is chastened also with pain
on his bed, with continual strife in his bones, \bibverse{20} so that
his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty food. \bibverse{21} His flesh
is so consumed away that it can't be seen. His bones that were not seen
stick out. \bibverse{22} Yes, his soul draws near to the pit, and his
life to the destroyers. \bibverse{23} ``If there is beside him an angel,
an interpreter, one amongst a thousand, to show to man what is right for
him, \bibverse{24} then God is gracious to him, and says, `Deliver him
from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.' \bibverse{25} His
flesh will be fresher than a child's. He returns to the days of his
youth. \bibverse{26} He prays to God, and he is favourable to him, so
that he sees his face with joy. He restores to man his righteousness.
\bibverse{27} He sings before men, and says, `I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it didn't profit me. \bibverse{28}
He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit. My life will see the
light.' \bibverse{29} ``Behold, God does all these things, twice, yes
three times, with a man, \bibverse{30} to bring back his soul from the
pit, that he may be enlightened with the light of the living.
\bibverse{31} Mark well, Job, and listen to me. Hold your peace, and I
will speak. \bibverse{32} If you have anything to say, answer me. Speak,
for I desire to justify you. \bibverse{33} If not, listen to me. Hold
your peace, and I will teach you wisdom.'' \# 34 \bibverse{1} Moreover
Elihu answered, \bibverse{2} ``Hear my words, you wise men. Give ear to
me, you who have knowledge. \bibverse{3} For the ear tries words, as the
palate tastes food. \bibverse{4} Let us choose for us that which is
right. Let us know amongst ourselves what is good. \bibverse{5} For Job
has said, `I am righteous, God has taken away my right. \bibverse{6}
Notwithstanding my right I am considered a liar. My wound is incurable,
though I am without disobedience.' \bibverse{7} What man is like Job,
who drinks scorn like water, \bibverse{8} who goes in company with the
workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men? \bibverse{9} For he has
said, `It profits a man nothing that he should delight himself with
God.' \bibverse{10} ``Therefore listen to me, you men of understanding:
far be it from God, that he should do wickedness, from the Almighty,
that he should commit iniquity. \bibverse{11} For the work of a man he
will render to him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.
\bibverse{12} Yes surely, God will not do wickedly, neither will the
Almighty pervert justice. \bibverse{13} Who put him in charge of the
earth? Or who has appointed him over the whole world? \bibverse{14} If
he set his heart on himself, if he gathered to himself his spirit and
his breath, \bibverse{15} all flesh would perish together, and man would
turn again to dust. \bibverse{16} ``If now you have understanding, hear
this. Listen to the voice of my words. \bibverse{17} Should even one who
hates justice govern? Will you condemn him who is righteous and mighty,
\bibverse{18} who says to a king, `Vile!' or to nobles, `Wicked!'?
\bibverse{19} He doesn't respect the persons of princes, nor respect the
rich more than the poor, for they all are the work of his hands.
\bibverse{20} In a moment they die, even at midnight. The people are
shaken and pass away. The mighty are taken away without a hand.
\bibverse{21} ``For his eyes are on the ways of a man. He sees all his
goings. \bibverse{22} There is no darkness, nor thick gloom, where the
workers of iniquity may hide themselves. \bibverse{23} For he doesn't
need to consider a man further, that he should go before God in
judgement. \bibverse{24} He breaks mighty men in pieces in ways past
finding out, and sets others in their place. \bibverse{25} Therefore he
takes knowledge of their works. He overturns them in the night, so that
they are destroyed. \bibverse{26} He strikes them as wicked men in the
open sight of others; \bibverse{27} because they turned away from
following him, and wouldn't pay attention to any of his ways,
\bibverse{28} so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him. He
heard the cry of the afflicted. \bibverse{29} When he gives quietness,
who then can condemn? When he hides his face, who then can see him? He
is over a nation or a man alike, \bibverse{30} that the godless man may
not reign, that there be no one to ensnare the people. \bibverse{31}
``For has any said to God, `I am guilty, but I will not offend any more.
\bibverse{32} Teach me that which I don't see. If I have done iniquity,
I will do it no more'? \bibverse{33} Shall his recompense be as you
desire, that you refuse it? For you must choose, and not I. Therefore
speak what you know. \bibverse{34} Men of understanding will tell me,
yes, every wise man who hears me: \bibverse{35} `Job speaks without
knowledge. His words are without wisdom.' \bibverse{36} I wish that Job
were tried to the end, because of his answering like wicked men.
\bibverse{37} For he adds rebellion to his sin. He claps his hands
amongst us, and multiplies his words against God.'' \# 35 \bibverse{1}
Moreover Elihu answered, \bibverse{2} ``Do you think this to be your
right, or do you say, `My righteousness is more than God's,'
\bibverse{3} that you ask, `What advantage will it be to you? What
profit will I have, more than if I had sinned?' \bibverse{4} I will
answer you, and your companions with you. \bibverse{5} Look to the
skies, and see. See the skies, which are higher than you. \bibverse{6}
If you have sinned, what effect do you have against him? If your
transgressions are multiplied, what do you do to him? \bibverse{7} If
you are righteous, what do you give him? Or what does he receive from
your hand? \bibverse{8} Your wickedness may hurt a man as you are, and
your righteousness may profit a son of man. \bibverse{9} ``By reason of
the multitude of oppressions they cry out. They cry for help by reason
of the arm of the mighty. \bibverse{10} But no one says, `Where is God
my Maker, who gives songs in the night, \bibverse{11} who teaches us
more than the animals of the earth, and makes us wiser than the birds of
the sky?' \bibverse{12} There they cry, but no one answers, because of
the pride of evil men. \bibverse{13} Surely God will not hear an empty
cry, neither will the Almighty regard it. \bibverse{14} How much less
when you say you don't see him. The cause is before him, and you wait
for him! \bibverse{15} But now, because he has not visited in his anger,
neither does he greatly regard arrogance, \bibverse{16} therefore Job
opens his mouth with empty talk, and he multiplies words without
knowledge.'' \# 36 \bibverse{1} Elihu also continued, and said,
\bibverse{2} ``Bear with me a little, and I will show you; for I still
have something to say on God's behalf. \bibverse{3} I will get my
knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
\bibverse{4} For truly my words are not false. One who is perfect in
knowledge is with you. \bibverse{5} ``Behold, God is mighty, and doesn't
despise anyone. He is mighty in strength of understanding. \bibverse{6}
He doesn't preserve the life of the wicked, but gives justice to the
afflicted. \bibverse{7} He doesn't withdraw his eyes from the righteous,
but with kings on the throne, he sets them forever, and they are
exalted. \bibverse{8} If they are bound in fetters, and are taken in the
cords of afflictions, \bibverse{9} then he shows them their work, and
their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly.
\bibverse{10} He also opens their ears to instruction, and commands that
they return from iniquity. \bibverse{11} If they listen and serve him,
they will spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.
\bibverse{12} But if they don't listen, they will perish by the sword;
they will die without knowledge. \bibverse{13} ``But those who are
godless in heart lay up anger. They don't cry for help when he binds
them. \bibverse{14} They die in youth. Their life perishes amongst the
unclean. \bibverse{15} He delivers the afflicted by their affliction,
and opens their ear in oppression. \bibverse{16} Yes, he would have
allured you out of distress, into a wide place, where there is no
restriction. That which is set on your table would be full of fatness.
\bibverse{17} ``But you are full of the judgement of the wicked.
Judgement and justice take hold of you. \bibverse{18} Don't let riches
entice you to wrath, neither let the great size of a bribe turn you
aside. \bibverse{19} Would your wealth sustain you in distress, or all
the might of your strength? \bibverse{20} Don't desire the night, when
people are cut off in their place. \bibverse{21} Take heed, don't regard
iniquity; for you have chosen this rather than affliction. \bibverse{22}
Behold, God is exalted in his power. Who is a teacher like him?
\bibverse{23} Who has prescribed his way for him? Or who can say, `You
have committed unrighteousness?' \bibverse{24} ``Remember that you
magnify his work, about which men have sung. \bibverse{25} All men have
looked on it. Man sees it afar off. \bibverse{26} Behold, God is great,
and we don't know him. The number of his years is unsearchable.
\bibverse{27} For he draws up the drops of water, which distill in rain
from his vapour, \bibverse{28} which the skies pour down and which drop
on man abundantly. \bibverse{29} Indeed, can anyone understand the
spreading of the clouds and the thunderings of his pavilion?
\bibverse{30} Behold, he spreads his light around him. He covers the
bottom of the sea. \bibverse{31} For by these he judges the people. He
gives food in abundance. \bibverse{32} He covers his hands with the
lightning, and commands it to strike the mark. \bibverse{33} Its noise
tells about him, and the livestock also, concerning the storm that comes
up. \# 37 \bibverse{1} ``Yes, at this my heart trembles, and is moved
out of its place. \bibverse{2} Hear, oh, hear the noise of his voice,
the sound that goes out of his mouth. \bibverse{3} He sends it out under
the whole sky, and his lightning to the ends of the earth. \bibverse{4}
After it a voice roars. He thunders with the voice of his majesty. He
doesn't hold back anything when his voice is heard. \bibverse{5} God
thunders marvellously with his voice. He does great things, which we
can't comprehend. \bibverse{6} For he says to the snow, `Fall on the
earth,' likewise to the shower of rain, and to the showers of his mighty
rain. \bibverse{7} He seals up the hand of every man, that all men whom
he has made may know it. \bibverse{8} Then the animals take cover, and
remain in their dens. \bibverse{9} Out of its room comes the storm, and
cold out of the north. \bibverse{10} By the breath of God, ice is given,
and the width of the waters is frozen. \bibverse{11} Yes, he loads the
thick cloud with moisture. He spreads abroad the cloud of his lightning.
\bibverse{12} It is turned around by his guidance, that they may do
whatever he commands them on the surface of the habitable world,
\bibverse{13} whether it is for correction, or for his land, or for
loving kindness, that he causes it to come. \bibverse{14} ``Listen to
this, Job. Stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
\bibverse{15} Do you know how God controls them, and causes the
lightning of his cloud to shine? \bibverse{16} Do you know the workings
of the clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge?
\bibverse{17} You whose clothing is warm when the earth is still by
reason of the south wind? \bibverse{18} Can you, with him, spread out
the sky, which is strong as a cast metal mirror? \bibverse{19} Teach us
what we will tell him, for we can't make our case by reason of darkness.
\bibverse{20} Will it be told him that I would speak? Or should a man
wish that he were swallowed up? \bibverse{21} Now men don't see the
light which is bright in the skies, but the wind passes, and clears
them. \bibverse{22} Out of the north comes golden splendour. With God is
awesome majesty. \bibverse{23} We can't reach the Almighty. He is
exalted in power. In justice and great righteousness, he will not
oppress. \bibverse{24} Therefore men revere him. He doesn't regard any
who are wise of heart.'' \# 38 \bibverse{1} Then the LORD answered Job
out of the whirlwind, \bibverse{2} ``Who is this who darkens counsel by
words without knowledge? \bibverse{3} Brace yourself like a man, for I
will question you, then you answer me! \bibverse{4} ``Where were you
when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if you have
understanding. \bibverse{5} Who determined its measures, if you know? Or
who stretched the line on it? \bibverse{6} What were its foundations
fastened on? Or who laid its cornerstone, \bibverse{7} when the morning
stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
\bibverse{8} ``Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it broke out of
the womb, \bibverse{9} when I made clouds its garment, and wrapped it in
thick darkness, \bibverse{10} marked out for it my bound, set bars and
doors, \bibverse{11} and said, `You may come here, but no further. Your
proud waves shall be stopped here'? \bibverse{12} ``Have you commanded
the morning in your days, and caused the dawn to know its place,
\bibverse{13} that it might take hold of the ends of the earth, and
shake the wicked out of it? \bibverse{14} It is changed as clay under
the seal, and presented as a garment. \bibverse{15} From the wicked,
their light is withheld. The high arm is broken. \bibverse{16} ``Have
you entered into the springs of the sea? Or have you walked in the
recesses of the deep? \bibverse{17} Have the gates of death been
revealed to you? Or have you seen the gates of the shadow of death?
\bibverse{18} Have you comprehended the earth in its width? Declare, if
you know it all. \bibverse{19} ``What is the way to the dwelling of
light? As for darkness, where is its place, \bibverse{20} that you
should take it to its bound, that you should discern the paths to its
house? \bibverse{21} Surely you know, for you were born then, and the
number of your days is great! \bibverse{22} Have you entered the
storehouses of the snow, or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
\bibverse{23} which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against
the day of battle and war? \bibverse{24} By what way is the lightning
distributed, or the east wind scattered on the earth? \bibverse{25} Who
has cut a channel for the flood water, or the path for the thunderstorm,
\bibverse{26} to cause it to rain on a land where there is no man, on
the wilderness, in which there is no man, \bibverse{27} to satisfy the
waste and desolate ground, to cause the tender grass to grow?
\bibverse{28} Does the rain have a father? Or who fathers the drops of
dew? \bibverse{29} Whose womb did the ice come out of? Who has given
birth to the grey frost of the sky? \bibverse{30} The waters become hard
like stone, when the surface of the deep is frozen. \bibverse{31} ``Can
you bind the cluster of the Pleiades, or loosen the cords of Orion?
\bibverse{32} Can you lead the constellations out in their season? Or
can you guide the Bear with her cubs? \bibverse{33} Do you know the laws
of the heavens? Can you establish its dominion over the earth?
\bibverse{34} ``Can you lift up your voice to the clouds, that abundance
of waters may cover you? \bibverse{35} Can you send out lightnings, that
they may go? Do they report to you, `Here we are'? \bibverse{36} Who has
put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the
mind? \bibverse{37} Who can count the clouds by wisdom? Or who can pour
out the containers of the sky, \bibverse{38} when the dust runs into a
mass, and the clods of earth stick together? \bibverse{39} ``Can you
hunt the prey for the lioness, or satisfy the appetite of the young
lions, \bibverse{40} when they crouch in their dens, and lie in wait in
the thicket? \bibverse{41} Who provides for the raven his prey, when his
young ones cry to God, and wander for lack of food? \# 39 \bibverse{1}
``Do you know the time when the mountain goats give birth? Do you watch
when the doe bears fawns? \bibverse{2} Can you count the months that
they fulfil? Or do you know the time when they give birth? \bibverse{3}
They bow themselves. They bear their young. They end their labour pains.
\bibverse{4} Their young ones become strong. They grow up in the open
field. They go out, and don't return again. \bibverse{5} ``Who has set
the wild donkey free? Or who has loosened the bonds of the swift donkey,
\bibverse{6} whose home I have made the wilderness, and the salt land
his dwelling place? \bibverse{7} He scorns the tumult of the city,
neither does he hear the shouting of the driver. \bibverse{8} The range
of the mountains is his pasture. He searches after every green thing.
\bibverse{9} ``Will the wild ox be content to serve you? Or will he stay
by your feeding trough? \bibverse{10} Can you hold the wild ox in the
furrow with his harness? Or will he till the valleys after you?
\bibverse{11} Will you trust him, because his strength is great? Or will
you leave to him your labour? \bibverse{12} Will you confide in him,
that he will bring home your seed, and gather the grain of your
threshing floor? \bibverse{13} ``The wings of the ostrich wave proudly,
but are they the feathers and plumage of love? \bibverse{14} For she
leaves her eggs on the earth, warms them in the dust, \bibverse{15} and
forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild animal may
trample them. \bibverse{16} She deals harshly with her young ones, as if
they were not hers. Though her labour is in vain, she is without fear,
\bibverse{17} because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he
imparted to her understanding. \bibverse{18} When she lifts up herself
on high, she scorns the horse and his rider. \bibverse{19} ``Have you
given the horse might? Have you clothed his neck with a quivering mane?
\bibverse{20} Have you made him to leap as a locust? The glory of his
snorting is awesome. \bibverse{21} He paws in the valley, and rejoices
in his strength. He goes out to meet the armed men. \bibverse{22} He
mocks at fear, and is not dismayed, neither does he turn back from the
sword. \bibverse{23} The quiver rattles against him, the flashing spear
and the javelin. \bibverse{24} He eats up the ground with fierceness and
rage, neither does he stand still at the sound of the trumpet.
\bibverse{25} As often as the trumpet sounds he snorts, `Aha!' He smells
the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
\bibverse{26} ``Is it by your wisdom that the hawk soars, and stretches
her wings towards the south? \bibverse{27} Is it at your command that
the eagle mounts up, and makes his nest on high? \bibverse{28} On the
cliff he dwells and makes his home, on the point of the cliff and the
stronghold. \bibverse{29} From there he spies out the prey. His eyes see
it afar off. \bibverse{30} His young ones also suck up blood. Where the
slain are, there he is.'' \# 40 \bibverse{1} Moreover the LORD answered
Job, \bibverse{2} ``Shall he who argues contend with the Almighty? He
who argues with God, let him answer it.'' \bibverse{3} Then Job answered
the LORD, \bibverse{4} ``Behold, I am of small account. What will I
answer you? I lay my hand on my mouth. \bibverse{5} I have spoken once,
and I will not answer; Yes, twice, but I will proceed no further.''
\bibverse{6} Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind:
\bibverse{7} ``Now brace yourself like a man. I will question you, and
you will answer me. \bibverse{8} Will you even annul my judgement? Will
you condemn me, that you may be justified? \bibverse{9} Or do you have
an arm like God? Can you thunder with a voice like him? \bibverse{10}
``Now deck yourself with excellency and dignity. Array yourself with
honour and majesty. \bibverse{11} Pour out the fury of your anger. Look
at everyone who is proud, and bring him low. \bibverse{12} Look at
everyone who is proud, and humble him. Crush the wicked in their place.
\bibverse{13} Hide them in the dust together. Bind their faces in the
hidden place. \bibverse{14} Then I will also admit to you that your own
right hand can save you. \bibverse{15} ``See now behemoth, which I made
as well as you. He eats grass as an ox. \bibverse{16} Look now, his
strength is in his thighs. His force is in the muscles of his belly.
\bibverse{17} He moves his tail like a cedar. The sinews of his thighs
are knit together. \bibverse{18} His bones are like tubes of bronze. His
limbs are like bars of iron. \bibverse{19} He is the chief of the ways
of God. He who made him gives him his sword. \bibverse{20} Surely the
mountains produce food for him, where all the animals of the field play.
\bibverse{21} He lies under the lotus trees, in the covert of the reed,
and the marsh. \bibverse{22} The lotuses cover him with their shade. The
willows of the brook surround him. \bibverse{23} Behold, if a river
overflows, he doesn't tremble. He is confident, though the Jordan swells
even to his mouth. \bibverse{24} Shall any take him when he is on the
watch, or pierce through his nose with a snare? \# 41 \bibverse{1} ``Can
you draw out Leviathan\footnote{41:1 Leviathan is a name for a crocodile
  or similar creature.} with a fish hook, or press down his tongue with
a cord? \bibverse{2} Can you put a rope into his nose, or pierce his jaw
through with a hook? \bibverse{3} Will he make many petitions to you, or
will he speak soft words to you? \bibverse{4} Will he make a covenant
with you, that you should take him for a servant forever? \bibverse{5}
Will you play with him as with a bird? Or will you bind him for your
girls? \bibverse{6} Will traders barter for him? Will they part him
amongst the merchants? \bibverse{7} Can you fill his skin with barbed
irons, or his head with fish spears? \bibverse{8} Lay your hand on him.
Remember the battle, and do so no more. \bibverse{9} Behold, the hope of
him is in vain. Won't one be cast down even at the sight of him?
\bibverse{10} None is so fierce that he dare stir him up. Who then is he
who can stand before me? \bibverse{11} Who has first given to me, that I
should repay him? Everything under the heavens is mine. \bibverse{12}
``I will not keep silence concerning his limbs, nor his mighty strength,
nor his goodly frame. \bibverse{13} Who can strip off his outer garment?
Who will come within his jaws? \bibverse{14} Who can open the doors of
his face? Around his teeth is terror. \bibverse{15} Strong scales are
his pride, shut up together with a close seal. \bibverse{16} One is so
near to another, that no air can come between them. \bibverse{17} They
are joined to one another. They stick together, so that they can't be
pulled apart. \bibverse{18} His sneezing flashes out light. His eyes are
like the eyelids of the morning. \bibverse{19} Out of his mouth go
burning torches. Sparks of fire leap out. \bibverse{20} Out of his
nostrils a smoke goes, as of a boiling pot over a fire of reeds.
\bibverse{21} His breath kindles coals. A flame goes out of his mouth.
\bibverse{22} There is strength in his neck. Terror dances before him.
\bibverse{23} The flakes of his flesh are joined together. They are firm
on him. They can't be moved. \bibverse{24} His heart is as firm as a
stone, yes, firm as the lower millstone. \bibverse{25} When he raises
himself up, the mighty are afraid. They retreat before his thrashing.
\bibverse{26} If one attacks him with the sword, it can't prevail; nor
the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft. \bibverse{27} He counts iron
as straw, and bronze as rotten wood. \bibverse{28} The arrow can't make
him flee. Sling stones are like chaff to him. \bibverse{29} Clubs are
counted as stubble. He laughs at the rushing of the javelin.
\bibverse{30} His undersides are like sharp potsherds, leaving a trail
in the mud like a threshing sledge. \bibverse{31} He makes the deep to
boil like a pot. He makes the sea like a pot of ointment. \bibverse{32}
He makes a path shine after him. One would think the deep had white
hair. \bibverse{33} On earth there is not his equal, that is made
without fear. \bibverse{34} He sees everything that is high. He is king
over all the sons of pride.''

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{42}\label{section-24}}

\bibverse{1} Then Job answered the LORD: \bibverse{2} ``I know that you
can do all things, and that no purpose of yours can be restrained.
\bibverse{3} You asked, `Who is this who hides counsel without
knowledge?' therefore I have uttered that which I didn't understand,
things too wonderful for me, which I didn't know. \bibverse{4} You said,
`Listen, now, and I will speak; I will question you, and you will answer
me.' \bibverse{5} I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear, but now
my eye sees you. \bibverse{6} Therefore I abhor myself, and repent in
dust and ashes.'' \bibverse{7} It was so, that after the LORD had spoken
these words to Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, ``My wrath is
kindled against you, and against your two friends; for you have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.
\bibverse{8} Now therefore, take to yourselves seven bulls and seven
rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt
offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you, for I will accept him,
that I not deal with you according to your folly. For you have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.''

\bibverse{9} So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar
the Naamathite went and did what the LORD commanded them, and the LORD
accepted Job.

\bibverse{10} The LORD restored Job's prosperity when he prayed for his
friends. The LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before. \bibverse{11}
Then all his brothers, all his sisters, and all those who had been of
his acquaintance before, came to him and ate bread with him in his
house. They comforted him, and consoled him concerning all the evil that
the LORD had brought on him. Everyone also gave him a piece of
money,\footnote{42:11 literally, kesitah, a unit of money, probably
  silver} and everyone a ring of gold.

\bibverse{12} So the LORD blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning. He had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, one
thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand female donkeys. \bibverse{13} He
had also seven sons and three daughters. \bibverse{14} He called the
name of the first, Jemimah; and the name of the second, Keziah; and the
name of the third, Keren Happuch. \bibverse{15} In all the land were no
women found so beautiful as the daughters of Job. Their father gave them
an inheritance amongst their brothers. \bibverse{16} After this Job
lived one hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons,
to four generations. \bibverse{17} So Job died, being old and full of
days.
