\hypertarget{the-futility-of-all-human-effort-as-a-result-of-the-constant-monotony-in-the-cycle-of-things}{%
\subsection{The futility of all human effort as a result of the constant
monotony in the cycle of
things}\label{the-futility-of-all-human-effort-as-a-result-of-the-constant-monotony-in-the-cycle-of-things}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in
Jerusalem: \bibleverse{2} ``Vanity of vanities,'' says the Preacher;
``Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.'' \bibleverse{3} What does man gain
from all his labour in which he labours under the sun? \bibleverse{4}
One generation goes, and another generation comes; but the earth remains
forever. \bibleverse{5} The sun also rises, and the sun goes down, and
hurries to its place where it rises. \bibleverse{6} The wind goes
towards the south, and turns around to the north. It turns around
continually as it goes, and the wind returns again to its courses.
\bibleverse{7} All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full.
To the place where the rivers flow, there they flow again.
\bibleverse{8} All things are full of weariness beyond uttering. The eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
\bibleverse{9} That which has been is that which shall be, and that
which has been done is that which shall be done; and there is no new
thing under the sun. \bibleverse{10} Is there a thing of which it may be
said, ``Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:10} ``Behold'', from
  ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze
  at. It is often used as an interjection.} this is new?'' It has been
long ago, in the ages which were before us. \bibleverse{11} There is no
memory of the former; neither shall there be any memory of the latter
that are to come, amongst those that shall come after.

\hypertarget{the-futility-of-striving-for-wisdom-and-knowledge-human-life-is-useless-to-the-viewer}{%
\subsection{The futility of striving for wisdom and knowledge; Human
life is useless to the
viewer}\label{the-futility-of-striving-for-wisdom-and-knowledge-human-life-is-useless-to-the-viewer}}

\bibleverse{12} I, the Preacher, was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{13} I applied my heart to seek and to search out by wisdom
concerning all that is done under the sky. It is a heavy burden that
God\footnote{\textbf{1:13} The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is
  ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} has given to the sons of men to be
afflicted with. \bibleverse{14} I have seen all the works that are done
under the sun; and behold, all is vanity and a chasing after wind.
\bibleverse{15} That which is crooked can't be made straight; and that
which is lacking can't be counted.

\hypertarget{seeking-clear-knowledge-leads-to-disappointment}{%
\subsection{Seeking clear knowledge leads to
disappointment}\label{seeking-clear-knowledge-leads-to-disappointment}}

\bibleverse{16} I said to myself, ``Behold, I have obtained for myself
great wisdom above all who were before me in Jerusalem. Yes, my heart
has had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.'' \bibleverse{17} I
applied my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly. I
perceived that this also was a chasing after wind. \bibleverse{18} For
in much wisdom is much grief; and he who increases knowledge increases
sorrow.

\hypertarget{the-futility-of-trying-to-gain-satisfaction-through-sensual-pleasures-and-enjoyment-of-life-or-through-creative-activity}{%
\subsection{The futility of trying to gain satisfaction through sensual
pleasures and enjoyment of life or through creative
activity}\label{the-futility-of-trying-to-gain-satisfaction-through-sensual-pleasures-and-enjoyment-of-life-or-through-creative-activity}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} I said in my heart, ``Come now, I will test you with
mirth; therefore enjoy pleasure;'' and behold, this also was vanity.
\bibleverse{2} I said of laughter, ``It is foolishness;'' and of mirth,
``What does it accomplish?'' \bibleverse{3} I searched in my heart how
to cheer my flesh with wine, my heart yet guiding me with wisdom, and
how to lay hold of folly, until I might see what it was good for the
sons of men that they should do under heaven all the days of their
lives. \bibleverse{4} I made myself great works. I built myself houses.
I planted myself vineyards. \bibleverse{5} I made myself gardens and
parks, and I planted trees in them of all kinds of fruit. \bibleverse{6}
I made myself pools of water, to water the forest where trees were
grown. \bibleverse{7} I bought male servants and female servants, and
had servants born in my house. I also had great possessions of herds and
flocks, above all who were before me in Jerusalem. \bibleverse{8} I also
gathered silver and gold for myself, and the treasure of kings and of
the provinces. I got myself male and female singers, and the delights of
the sons of men: musical instruments of all sorts. \bibleverse{9} So I
was great, and increased more than all who were before me in Jerusalem.
My wisdom also remained with me. \bibleverse{10} Whatever my eyes
desired, I didn't keep from them. I didn't withhold my heart from any
joy, for my heart rejoiced because of all my labour, and this was my
portion from all my labour. \bibleverse{11} Then I looked at all the
works that my hands had worked, and at the labour that I had laboured to
do; and behold, all was vanity and a chasing after wind, and there was
no profit under the sun.

\hypertarget{in-the-end-wisdom-is-as-empty-as-madness-because-the-final-destiny-of-the-wise-and-the-foolish-is-the-same}{%
\subsection{In the end, wisdom is as empty as madness, because the final
destiny of the wise and the foolish is the
same}\label{in-the-end-wisdom-is-as-empty-as-madness-because-the-final-destiny-of-the-wise-and-the-foolish-is-the-same}}

\bibleverse{12} I turned myself to consider wisdom, madness, and folly;
for what can the king's successor do? Just that which has been done long
ago. \bibleverse{13} Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as
light excels darkness. \bibleverse{14} The wise man's eyes are in his
head, and the fool walks in darkness---and yet I perceived that one
event happens to them all. \bibleverse{15} Then I said in my heart, ``As
it happens to the fool, so will it happen even to me; and why was I then
more wise?'' Then I said in my heart that this also is vanity.
\bibleverse{16} For of the wise man, even as of the fool, there is no
memory forever, since in the days to come all will have been long
forgotten. Indeed, the wise man must die just like the fool!
\bibleverse{17} So I hated life, because the work that is worked under
the sun was grievous to me; for all is vanity and a chasing after wind.

\hypertarget{reference-to-the-evil-that-the-wise-man-must-leave-the-benefit-and-enjoyment-of-his-laborious-work-to-a-perhaps-foolish-heir}{%
\subsection{Reference to the evil that the wise man must leave the
benefit and enjoyment of his laborious work to a perhaps foolish
heir}\label{reference-to-the-evil-that-the-wise-man-must-leave-the-benefit-and-enjoyment-of-his-laborious-work-to-a-perhaps-foolish-heir}}

\bibleverse{18} I hated all my labour in which I laboured under the sun,
because I must leave it to the man who comes after me. \bibleverse{19}
Who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool? Yet he will have rule
over all of my labour in which I have laboured, and in which I have
shown myself wise under the sun. This also is vanity. \bibleverse{20}
Therefore I began to cause my heart to despair concerning all the labour
in which I had laboured under the sun. \bibleverse{21} For there is a
man whose labour is with wisdom, with knowledge, and with skilfulness;
yet he shall leave it for his portion to a man who has not laboured for
it. This also is vanity and a great evil. \bibleverse{22} For what does
a man have of all his labour and of the striving of his heart, in which
he labours under the sun? \bibleverse{23} For all his days are sorrows,
and his travail is grief; yes, even in the night his heart takes no
rest. This also is vanity.

\hypertarget{then-the-best-thing-for-man-is-to-enjoy-the-moment-to-the-extent-that-god-grants-it}{%
\subsection{Then the best thing for man is to enjoy the moment to the
extent that God grants
it}\label{then-the-best-thing-for-man-is-to-enjoy-the-moment-to-the-extent-that-god-grants-it}}

\bibleverse{24} There is nothing better for a man than that he should
eat and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I
saw, that it is from the hand of God. \bibleverse{25} For who can eat,
or who can have enjoyment, more than I? \bibleverse{26} For to the man
who pleases him, God gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner
he gives travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him who
pleases God. This also is vanity and a chasing after wind.

\hypertarget{everything-has-its-time}{%
\subsection{Everything has its time}\label{everything-has-its-time}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} For everything there is a season, and a time for every
purpose under heaven: \bibleverse{2} a time to be born, and a time to
die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;
\bibleverse{3} a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down,
and a time to build up; \bibleverse{4} a time to weep, and a time to
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance; \bibleverse{5} a time to
cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to
embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; \bibleverse{6} a time to
seek, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;
\bibleverse{7} a time to tear, and a time to sew; a time to keep
silence, and a time to speak; \bibleverse{8} a time to love, and a time
to hate; a time for war, and a time for peace.

\hypertarget{but-man-does-not-know-the-time-set-by-god-and-is-powerless-against-it}{%
\subsection{But man does not know the time set by God and is powerless
against
it}\label{but-man-does-not-know-the-time-set-by-god-and-is-powerless-against-it}}

\bibleverse{9} What profit has he who works in that in which he labours?
\bibleverse{10} I have seen the burden which God has given to the sons
of men to be afflicted with. \bibleverse{11} He has made everything
beautiful in its time. He has also set eternity in their hearts, yet so
that man can't find out the work that God has done from the beginning
even to the end. \bibleverse{12} I know that there is nothing better for
them than to rejoice, and to do good as long as they live.
\bibleverse{13} Also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy good
in all his labour, is the gift of God. \bibleverse{14} I know that
whatever God does, it shall be forever. Nothing can be added to it, nor
anything taken from it; and God has done it, that men should fear before
him. \bibleverse{15} That which is has been long ago, and that which is
to be has been long ago. God seeks again that which is passed away.

\hypertarget{in-the-human-world-there-is-evil-and-injustice-but-god-is-the-world-judge}{%
\subsection{In the human world there is evil and injustice, but God is
the world
judge}\label{in-the-human-world-there-is-evil-and-injustice-but-god-is-the-world-judge}}

\bibleverse{16} Moreover I saw under the sun, in the place of justice,
that wickedness was there; and in the place of righteousness, that
wickedness was there. \bibleverse{17} I said in my heart, ``God will
judge the righteous and the wicked; for there is a time there for every
purpose and for every work.''

\hypertarget{the-law-of-impermanence-exists-for-both-humans-and-animals-and-exhorts-to-enjoy-life}{%
\subsection{The law of impermanence exists for both humans and animals
and exhorts to enjoy
life}\label{the-law-of-impermanence-exists-for-both-humans-and-animals-and-exhorts-to-enjoy-life}}

\bibleverse{18} I said in my heart, ``As for the sons of men, God tests
them, so that they may see that they themselves are like animals.
\bibleverse{19} For that which happens to the sons of men happens to
animals. Even one thing happens to them. As the one dies, so the other
dies. Yes, they have all one breath; and man has no advantage over the
animals, for all is vanity. \bibleverse{20} All go to one place. All are
from the dust, and all turn to dust again. \bibleverse{21} Who knows the
spirit of man, whether it goes upward, and the spirit of the animal,
whether it goes downward to the earth?'' \bibleverse{22} Therefore I saw
that there is nothing better than that a man should rejoice in his
works, for that is his portion; for who can bring him to see what will
be after him?

\hypertarget{oppression-jealousy-and-partly-restless-work-partly-slow-calm-devalue-life}{%
\subsection{Oppression, jealousy and partly restless work, partly slow
calm devalue
life}\label{oppression-jealousy-and-partly-restless-work-partly-slow-calm-devalue-life}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Then I returned and saw all the oppressions that are done
under the sun: and behold, the tears of those who were oppressed, and
they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was
power; but they had no comforter. \bibleverse{2} Therefore I praised the
dead who have been long dead more than the living who are yet alive.
\bibleverse{3} Yes, better than them both is him who has not yet been,
who has not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.
\bibleverse{4} Then I saw all the labour and achievement that is the
envy of a man's neighbour. This also is vanity and a striving after
wind. \bibleverse{5} The fool folds his hands together and ruins
himself. \bibleverse{6} Better is a handful, with quietness, than two
handfuls with labour and chasing after wind.

\hypertarget{the-effort-of-the-single-person-is-useless-two-workers-who-work-together-are-better-off}{%
\subsection{The effort of the single person is useless; two workers who
work together are better
off}\label{the-effort-of-the-single-person-is-useless-two-workers-who-work-together-are-better-off}}

\bibleverse{7} Then I returned and saw vanity under the sun.
\bibleverse{8} There is one who is alone, and he has neither son nor
brother. There is no end to all of his labour, neither are his eyes
satisfied with wealth. ``For whom then do I labour and deprive my soul
of enjoyment?'' This also is vanity. Yes, it is a miserable business.
\bibleverse{9} Two are better than one, because they have a good reward
for their labour. \bibleverse{10} For if they fall, the one will lift up
his fellow; but woe to him who is alone when he falls, and doesn't have
another to lift him up. \bibleverse{11} Again, if two lie together, then
they have warmth; but how can one keep warm alone? \bibleverse{12} If a
man prevails against one who is alone, two shall withstand him; and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.

\hypertarget{communication-of-a-historical-event-confirming-the-preachers-observation-that-popular-favor-is-unreliable}{%
\subsection{Communication of a historical event confirming the
preacher's observation that popular favor is
unreliable}\label{communication-of-a-historical-event-confirming-the-preachers-observation-that-popular-favor-is-unreliable}}

\bibleverse{13} Better is a poor and wise youth than an old and foolish
king who doesn't know how to receive admonition any more.
\bibleverse{14} For out of prison he came out to be king; yes, even in
his kingdom he was born poor. \bibleverse{15} I saw all the living who
walk under the sun, that they were with the youth, the other, who
succeeded him. \bibleverse{16} There was no end of all the people, even
of all them over whom he was---yet those who come after shall not
rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and a chasing after wind.

\hypertarget{reminder-to-be-careful-when-performing-religious-duties-with-sacrifices-prayer-and-vows}{%
\subsection{Reminder to be careful when performing religious duties
(with sacrifices, prayer and
vows)}\label{reminder-to-be-careful-when-performing-religious-duties-with-sacrifices-prayer-and-vows}}

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Guard your steps when you go to God's house; for to draw
near to listen is better than to give the sacrifice of fools, for they
don't know that they do evil. \bibleverse{2} Don't be rash with your
mouth, and don't let your heart be hasty to utter anything before God;
for God is in heaven, and you on earth. Therefore let your words be few.
\bibleverse{3} For as a dream comes with a multitude of cares, so a
fool's speech with a multitude of words. \bibleverse{4} When you vow a
vow to God, don't defer to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools. Pay
that which you vow. \bibleverse{5} It is better that you should not vow,
than that you should vow and not pay. \bibleverse{6} Don't allow your
mouth to lead you into sin. Don't protest before the messenger that this
was a mistake. Why should God be angry at your voice, and destroy the
work of your hands? \bibleverse{7} For in the multitude of dreams there
are vanities, as well as in many words; but you must fear God.

\hypertarget{the-oppressions-in-the-state-are-unfortunate-but-understandable-royalty-blessings-for-farm-states}{%
\subsection{The oppressions in the state are unfortunate, but
understandable; Royalty Blessings for Farm
States}\label{the-oppressions-in-the-state-are-unfortunate-but-understandable-royalty-blessings-for-farm-states}}

\bibleverse{8} If you see the oppression of the poor, and the violent
taking away of justice and righteousness in a district, don't marvel at
the matter, for one official is eyed by a higher one, and there are
officials over them. \bibleverse{9} Moreover the profit of the earth is
for all. The king profits from the field.

\hypertarget{nullity-and-complaints-of-riches}{%
\subsection{Nullity and complaints of
riches}\label{nullity-and-complaints-of-riches}}

\bibleverse{10} He who loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver,
nor he who loves abundance, with increase. This also is vanity.
\bibleverse{11} When goods increase, those who eat them are increased;
and what advantage is there to its owner, except to feast on them with
his eyes? \bibleverse{12} The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether
he eats little or much; but the abundance of the rich will not allow him
to sleep. \bibleverse{13} There is a grievous evil which I have seen
under the sun: wealth kept by its owner to his harm. \bibleverse{14}
Those riches perish by misfortune, and if he has fathered a son, there
is nothing in his hand. \bibleverse{15} As he came out of his mother's
womb, naked shall he go again as he came, and shall take nothing for his
labour, which he may carry away in his hand. \bibleverse{16} This also
is a grievous evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go. And
what profit does he have who labours for the wind? \bibleverse{17} All
his days he also eats in darkness, he is frustrated, and has sickness
and wrath.

\hypertarget{recommendation-of-the-enjoyment-of-life-in-addition-to-work-and-wealth}{%
\subsection{Recommendation of the enjoyment of life in addition to work
and
wealth}\label{recommendation-of-the-enjoyment-of-life-in-addition-to-work-and-wealth}}

\bibleverse{18} Behold, that which I have seen to be good and proper is
for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy good in all his labour, in
which he labours under the sun, all the days of his life which God has
given him; for this is his portion. \bibleverse{19} Every man also to
whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given him power to eat of
it, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labour---this is the
gift of God. \bibleverse{20} For he shall not often reflect on the days
of his life, because God occupies him with the joy of his heart.

\hypertarget{someone-has-rich-goods-but-does-not-enjoy-them}{%
\subsection{Someone has rich goods but does not enjoy
them}\label{someone-has-rich-goods-but-does-not-enjoy-them}}

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it
is heavy on men: \bibleverse{2} a man to whom God gives riches, wealth,
and honour, so that he lacks nothing for his soul of all that he
desires, yet God gives him no power to eat of it, but an alien eats it.
This is vanity, and it is an evil disease. \bibleverse{3} If a man
fathers a hundred children, and lives many years, so that the days of
his years are many, but his soul is not filled with good, and moreover
he has no burial, I say that a stillborn child is better than he;
\bibleverse{4} for it comes in vanity, and departs in darkness, and its
name is covered with darkness. \bibleverse{5} Moreover it has not seen
the sun nor known it. This has rest rather than the other.
\bibleverse{6} Yes, though he live a thousand years twice told, and yet
fails to enjoy good, don't all go to one place?

\hypertarget{the-insatiability-of-desire-and-the-search-for-pleasure}{%
\subsection{The insatiability of desire and the search for
pleasure}\label{the-insatiability-of-desire-and-the-search-for-pleasure}}

\bibleverse{7} All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the
appetite is not filled. \bibleverse{8} For what advantage has the wise
more than the fool? What has the poor man, that knows how to walk before
the living? \bibleverse{9} Better is the sight of the eyes than the
wandering of the desire. This also is vanity and a chasing after wind.

\hypertarget{human-powerlessness-in-relation-to-the-divine-predestination-of-all-things-especially-the-lives-of-individual-persons}{%
\subsection{Human powerlessness in relation to the divine predestination
of all things (especially the lives of individual
persons)}\label{human-powerlessness-in-relation-to-the-divine-predestination-of-all-things-especially-the-lives-of-individual-persons}}

\bibleverse{10} Whatever has been, its name was given long ago; and it
is known what man is; neither can he contend with him who is mightier
than he. \bibleverse{11} For there are many words that create vanity.
What does that profit man? \bibleverse{12} For who knows what is good
for man in life, all the days of his vain life which he spends like a
shadow? For who can tell a man what will be after him under the sun?

\hypertarget{warnings-to-be-serious-with-life-and-patiently-submit-to-divine-decrees}{%
\subsection{Warnings to be serious with life and patiently submit to
divine
decrees}\label{warnings-to-be-serious-with-life-and-patiently-submit-to-divine-decrees}}

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} A good name is better than fine perfume; and the day of
death better than the day of one's birth. \bibleverse{2} It is better to
go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting; for
that is the end of all men, and the living should take this to heart.
\bibleverse{3} Sorrow is better than laughter; for by the sadness of the
face the heart is made good. \bibleverse{4} The heart of the wise is in
the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
\bibleverse{5} It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise than for a
man to hear the song of fools. \bibleverse{6} For as the crackling of
thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool. This also is vanity.
\bibleverse{7} Surely extortion makes the wise man foolish; and a bribe
destroys the understanding. \bibleverse{8} Better is the end of a thing
than its beginning. The patient in spirit is better than the proud in
spirit. \bibleverse{9} Don't be hasty in your spirit to be angry, for
anger rests in the bosom of fools. \bibleverse{10} Don't say, ``Why were
the former days better than these?'' For you do not ask wisely about
this. \bibleverse{11} Wisdom is as good as an inheritance. Yes, it is
more excellent for those who see the sun. \bibleverse{12} For wisdom is
a defence, even as money is a defence; but the excellency of knowledge
is that wisdom preserves the life of him who has it. \bibleverse{13}
Consider the work of God, for who can make that straight which he has
made crooked? \bibleverse{14} In the day of prosperity be joyful, and in
the day of adversity consider; yes, God has made the one side by side
with the other, to the end that man should not find out anything after
him.

\hypertarget{warning-against-all-excess-and-admonition-of-true-wisdom}{%
\subsection{Warning against all excess and admonition of true
wisdom}\label{warning-against-all-excess-and-admonition-of-true-wisdom}}

\bibleverse{15} All this I have seen in my days of vanity: there is a
righteous man who perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked
man who lives long in his evildoing. \bibleverse{16} Don't be overly
righteous, neither make yourself overly wise. Why should you destroy
yourself? \bibleverse{17} Don't be too wicked, neither be foolish. Why
should you die before your time? \bibleverse{18} It is good that you
should take hold of this. Yes, also don't withdraw your hand from that;
for he who fears God will come out of them all. \bibleverse{19} Wisdom
is a strength to the wise man more than ten rulers who are in a city.
\bibleverse{20} Surely there is not a righteous man on earth who does
good and doesn't sin. \bibleverse{21} Also don't take heed to all words
that are spoken, lest you hear your servant curse you; \bibleverse{22}
for often your own heart knows that you yourself have likewise cursed
others. \bibleverse{23} All this I have proved in wisdom. I said, ``I
will be wise;'' but it was far from me. \bibleverse{24} That which is,
is far off and exceedingly deep. Who can find it out?

\hypertarget{the-preachers-bad-experiences-with-women}{%
\subsection{The preacher's bad experiences with
women}\label{the-preachers-bad-experiences-with-women}}

\bibleverse{25} I turned around, and my heart sought to know and to
search out, and to seek wisdom and the scheme of things, and to know
that wickedness is stupidity, and that foolishness is madness.
\bibleverse{26} I find more bitter than death the woman whose heart is
snares and traps, whose hands are chains. Whoever pleases God shall
escape from her; but the sinner will be ensnared by her. \bibleverse{27}
``Behold, I have found this,'' says the Preacher, ``to one another, to
find an explanation \bibleverse{28} which my soul still seeks, but I
have not found. I have found one man amongst a thousand, but I have not
found a woman amongst all those. \bibleverse{29} Behold, I have only
found this: that God made mankind upright; but they search for many
inventions.''

\hypertarget{the-conduct-of-the-sage-towards-the-ruler-and-in-days-of-oppression}{%
\subsection{The conduct of the sage towards the ruler and in days of
oppression}\label{the-conduct-of-the-sage-towards-the-ruler-and-in-days-of-oppression}}

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Who is like the wise man? And who knows the
interpretation of a thing? A man's wisdom makes his face shine, and the
hardness of his face is changed. \bibleverse{2} I say, ``Keep the king's
command!'' because of the oath to God. \bibleverse{3} Don't be hasty to
go out of his presence. Don't persist in an evil thing, for he does
whatever pleases him, \bibleverse{4} for the king's word is supreme. Who
can say to him, ``What are you doing?'' \bibleverse{5} Whoever keeps the
commandment shall not come to harm, and his wise heart will know the
time and procedure.

\hypertarget{impotence-and-disorientation-of-man}{%
\subsection{Impotence and disorientation of
man}\label{impotence-and-disorientation-of-man}}

\bibleverse{6} For there is a time and procedure for every purpose,
although the misery of man is heavy on him. \bibleverse{7} For he
doesn't know that which will be; for who can tell him how it will be?
\bibleverse{8} There is no man who has power over the spirit to contain
the spirit; neither does he have power over the day of death. There is
no discharge in war; neither shall wickedness deliver those who practise
it.

\hypertarget{righteous-and-wicked-usually-meet-the-same-fate-in-a-single-violence-it-belongs-when-one-has-guidelines-for-the-enjoyment-of-life-at-work}{%
\subsection{Righteous and wicked usually meet the same fate in a single
violence; It belongs when one has guidelines for the enjoyment of life
at
work}\label{righteous-and-wicked-usually-meet-the-same-fate-in-a-single-violence-it-belongs-when-one-has-guidelines-for-the-enjoyment-of-life-at-work}}

\bibleverse{9} All this I have seen, and applied my mind to every work
that is done under the sun. There is a time in which one man has power
over another to his hurt. \bibleverse{10} So I saw the wicked buried.
Indeed they came also from holiness. They went and were forgotten in the
city where they did this. This also is vanity. \bibleverse{11} Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
\bibleverse{12} Though a sinner commits crimes a hundred times, and
lives long, yet surely I know that it will be better with those who fear
God, who are reverent before him. \bibleverse{13} But it shall not be
well with the wicked, neither shall he lengthen days like a shadow,
because he doesn't fear God. \bibleverse{14} There is a vanity which is
done on the earth, that there are righteous men to whom it happens
according to the work of the wicked. Again, there are wicked men to whom
it happens according to the work of the righteous. I said that this also
is vanity. \bibleverse{15} Then I commended mirth, because a man has no
better thing under the sun than to eat, to drink, and to be joyful: for
that will accompany him in his labour all the days of his life which God
has given him under the sun.

\hypertarget{the-government-of-god-in-the-world-government-is-unfathomable-to-man}{%
\subsection{The government of God in the world government is
unfathomable to
man}\label{the-government-of-god-in-the-world-government-is-unfathomable-to-man}}

\bibleverse{16} When I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to see the
business that is done on the earth (even though eyes see no sleep day or
night), \bibleverse{17} then I saw all the work of God, that man can't
find out the work that is done under the sun, because however much a man
labours to seek it out, yet he won't find it. Yes even though a wise man
thinks he can comprehend it, he won't be able to find it.

\hypertarget{the-same-fate-for-all-in-life-and-in-death-human-impotence-against-deity-pious-enjoyment-of-life-before-death-sets-a-goal-for-all-enjoyment-and-activity}{%
\subsection{The same fate for all in life and in death; human impotence
against deity; Pious enjoyment of life before death sets a goal for all
enjoyment and
activity}\label{the-same-fate-for-all-in-life-and-in-death-human-impotence-against-deity-pious-enjoyment-of-life-before-death-sets-a-goal-for-all-enjoyment-and-activity}}

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} For all this I laid to my heart, even to explore all
this: that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand
of God; whether it is love or hatred, man doesn't know it; all is before
them. \bibleverse{2} All things come alike to all. There is one event to
the righteous and to the wicked; to the good, to the clean, to the
unclean, to him who sacrifices, and to him who doesn't sacrifice. As is
the good, so is the sinner; he who takes an oath, as he who fears an
oath. \bibleverse{3} This is an evil in all that is done under the sun,
that there is one event to all. Yes also, the heart of the sons of men
is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and
after that they go to the dead. \bibleverse{4} For to him who is joined
with all the living there is hope; for a living dog is better than a
dead lion. \bibleverse{5} For the living know that they will die, but
the dead don't know anything, neither do they have any more a reward;
for their memory is forgotten. \bibleverse{6} Also their love, their
hatred, and their envy has perished long ago; neither do they any longer
have a portion forever in anything that is done under the sun.
\bibleverse{7} Go your way---eat your bread with joy, and drink your
wine with a merry heart; for God has already accepted your works.
\bibleverse{8} Let your garments be always white, and don't let your
head lack oil. \bibleverse{9} Live joyfully with the wife whom you love
all the days of your life of vanity, which he has given you under the
sun, all your days of vanity, for that is your portion in life, and in
your labour in which you labour under the sun. \bibleverse{10} Whatever
your hand finds to do, do it with your might; for there is no work, nor
plan, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheol,\footnote{\textbf{9:10} Sheol
  is the place of the dead.} where you are going.

\hypertarget{mans-dependence-on-destiny}{%
\subsection{Man's Dependence on
Destiny}\label{mans-dependence-on-destiny}}

\bibleverse{11} I returned and saw under the sun that the race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill;
but time and chance happen to them all. \bibleverse{12} For man also
doesn't know his time. As the fish that are taken in an evil net, and as
the birds that are caught in the snare, even so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly on them.

\hypertarget{more-life-experiences-and-wisdom-sayings}{%
\subsection{More life experiences and wisdom
sayings}\label{more-life-experiences-and-wisdom-sayings}}

\bibleverse{13} I have also seen wisdom under the sun in this way, and
it seemed great to me. \bibleverse{14} There was a little city, and few
men within it; and a great king came against it, besieged it, and built
great bulwarks against it. \bibleverse{15} Now a poor wise man was found
in it, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered
that same poor man. \bibleverse{16} Then I said, ``Wisdom is better than
strength.'' Nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his
words are not heard. \bibleverse{17} The words of the wise heard in
quiet are better than the cry of him who rules amongst fools.
\bibleverse{18} Wisdom is better than weapons of war; but one sinner
destroys much good.

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Dead flies cause the oil of the perfumer to produce an
evil odour; so does a little folly outweigh wisdom and honour.
\bibleverse{2} A wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fool's
heart at his left. \bibleverse{3} Yes also when the fool walks by the
way, his understanding fails him, and he says to everyone that he is a
fool. \bibleverse{4} If the spirit of the ruler rises up against you,
don't leave your place; for gentleness lays great offences to rest.
\bibleverse{5} There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, the
sort of error which proceeds from the ruler. \bibleverse{6} Folly is set
in great dignity, and the rich sit in a low place. \bibleverse{7} I have
seen servants on horses, and princes walking like servants on the earth.
\bibleverse{8} He who digs a pit may fall into it; and whoever breaks
through a wall may be bitten by a snake. \bibleverse{9} Whoever carves
out stones may be injured by them. Whoever splits wood may be endangered
by it. \bibleverse{10} If the axe is blunt, and one doesn't sharpen the
edge, then he must use more strength; but skill brings success.
\bibleverse{11} If the snake bites before it is charmed, then is there
no profit for the charmer's tongue. \bibleverse{12} The words of a wise
man's mouth are gracious; but a fool is swallowed by his own lips.
\bibleverse{13} The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness;
and the end of his talk is mischievous madness. \bibleverse{14} A fool
also multiplies words. Man doesn't know what will be; and that which
will be after him, who can tell him? \bibleverse{15} The labour of fools
wearies every one of them; for he doesn't know how to go to the city.
\bibleverse{16} Woe to you, land, when your king is a child, and your
princes eat in the morning! \bibleverse{17} Happy are you, land, when
your king is the son of nobles, and your princes eat in due season, for
strength, and not for drunkenness! \bibleverse{18} By slothfulness the
roof sinks in; and through idleness of the hands the house leaks.
\bibleverse{19} A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes the life
glad; and money is the answer for all things. \bibleverse{20} Don't
curse the king, no, not in your thoughts; and don't curse the rich in
your bedroom, for a bird of the sky may carry your voice, and that which
has wings may tell the matter.

\hypertarget{intelligent-and-profitable-action-in-the-face-of-the-uncertainty-of-everything-earthly}{%
\subsection{Intelligent and profitable action in the face of the
uncertainty of everything
earthly}\label{intelligent-and-profitable-action-in-the-face-of-the-uncertainty-of-everything-earthly}}

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} Cast your bread on the waters; for you shall find it
after many days. \bibleverse{2} Give a portion to seven, yes, even to
eight; for you don't know what evil will be on the earth. \bibleverse{3}
If the clouds are full of rain, they empty themselves on the earth; and
if a tree falls towards the south, or towards the north, in the place
where the tree falls, there shall it be. \bibleverse{4} He who observes
the wind won't sow; and he who regards the clouds won't reap.
\bibleverse{5} As you don't know what is the way of the wind, nor how
the bones grow in the womb of her who is with child; even so you don't
know the work of God who does all. \bibleverse{6} In the morning sow
your seed, and in the evening don't withhold your hand; for you don't
know which will prosper, whether this or that, or whether they both will
be equally good. \bibleverse{7} Truly the light is sweet, and it is a
pleasant thing for the eyes to see the sun. \bibleverse{8} Yes, if a man
lives many years, let him rejoice in them all; but let him remember the
days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is vanity.

\hypertarget{reminder-to-fully-enjoy-life-in-youth-but-please-god}{%
\subsection{Reminder to fully enjoy life in youth, but please
God}\label{reminder-to-fully-enjoy-life-in-youth-but-please-god}}

\bibleverse{9} Rejoice, young man, in your youth, and let your heart
cheer you in the days of your youth, and walk in the ways of your heart,
and in the sight of your eyes; but know that for all these things God
will bring you into judgement. \bibleverse{10} Therefore remove sorrow
from your heart, and put away evil from your flesh; for youth and the
dawn of life are vanity.

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Remember also your Creator in the days of your youth,
before the evil days come, and the years draw near, when you will say,
``I have no pleasure in them;''

\hypertarget{description-of-the-ailments-of-old-age}{%
\subsection{Description of the ailments of old
age}\label{description-of-the-ailments-of-old-age}}

\bibleverse{2} Before the sun, the light, the moon, and the stars are
darkened, and the clouds return after the rain; \bibleverse{3} in the
day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and
those who look out of the windows are darkened, \bibleverse{4} and the
doors shall be shut in the street; when the sound of the grinding is
low, and one shall rise up at the voice of a bird, and all the daughters
of music shall be brought low; \bibleverse{5} yes, they shall be afraid
of heights, and terrors will be on the way; and the almond tree shall
blossom, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail;
because man goes to his everlasting home, and the mourners go about the
streets; \bibleverse{6} before the silver cord is severed, or the golden
bowl is broken, or the pitcher is broken at the spring, or the wheel
broken at the cistern, \bibleverse{7} and the dust returns to the earth
as it was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it. \bibleverse{8}
``Vanity of vanities,'' says the Preacher. ``All is vanity!''
\bibleverse{9} Further, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught
the people knowledge. Yes, he pondered, sought out, and set in order
many proverbs. \bibleverse{10} The Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words, and that which was written blamelessly, words of
truth. \bibleverse{11} The words of the wise are like goads; and like
nails well fastened are words from the masters of assemblies, which are
given from one shepherd.

\hypertarget{warning-against-useless-musings-end-result-list}{%
\subsection{Warning against useless musings; End result
list}\label{warning-against-useless-musings-end-result-list}}

\bibleverse{12} Furthermore, my son, be admonished: of making many books
there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.
\bibleverse{13} This is the end of the matter. All has been heard. Fear
God and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.
\bibleverse{14} For God will bring every work into judgement, with every
hidden thing, whether it is good, or whether it is evil.
