\hypertarget{jonahs-call-disobedience-and-punishment}{%
\subsection{Jonah's call, disobedience and
punishment}\label{jonahs-call-disobedience-and-punishment}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Now the \textsc{Lord}'s\footnote{\textbf{1:1} When
  rendered in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS, ``\textsc{Lord}'' or ``GOD'' is the
  translation of God's Proper Name.} word came to Jonah the son of
Amittai, saying, \bibleverse{2} ``Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city,
and preach against it, for their wickedness has come up before me.''
\bibleverse{3} But Jonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the presence
of the \textsc{Lord}. He went down to Joppa, and found a ship going to
Tarshish; so he paid its fare, and went down into it, to go with them to
Tarshish from the presence of the \textsc{Lord}. \bibleverse{4} But the
\textsc{Lord} sent out a great wind on the sea, and there was a mighty
storm on the sea, so that the ship was likely to break up.
\bibleverse{5} Then the mariners were afraid, and every man cried to his
god. They threw the cargo that was in the ship into the sea to lighten
the ship. But Jonah had gone down into the innermost parts of the ship
and he was laying down, and was fast asleep. \bibleverse{6} So the ship
master came to him, and said to him, ``What do you mean, sleeper? Arise,
call on your God!\footnote{\textbf{1:6} or, gods} Maybe your
God\footnote{\textbf{1:6} or, gods} will notice us, so that we won't
perish.'' \bibleverse{7} They all said to each other, ``Come! Let's cast
lots, that we may know who is responsible for this evil that is on us.''
So they cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonah. \bibleverse{8} Then they
asked him, ``Tell us, please, for whose cause this evil is on us. What
is your occupation? Where do you come from? What is your country? Of
what people are you?'' \bibleverse{9} He said to them, ``I am a Hebrew,
and I fear the \textsc{Lord}, the God\footnote{\textbf{1:9} The Hebrew
  word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} of heaven, who
has made the sea and the dry land.'' \bibleverse{10} Then the men were
exceedingly afraid, and said to him, ``What have you done?'' For the men
knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the \textsc{Lord}, because
he had told them. \bibleverse{11} Then they said to him, ``What shall we
do to you, that the sea may be calm to us?'' For the sea grew more and
more stormy. \bibleverse{12} He said to them, ``Take me up, and throw me
into the sea. Then the sea will be calm for you; for I know that because
of me this great storm is on you.'' \bibleverse{13} Nevertheless the men
rowed hard to get them back to the land; but they could not, for the sea
grew more and more stormy against them. \bibleverse{14} Therefore they
cried to the \textsc{Lord}, and said, ``We beg you, \textsc{Lord}, we
beg you, don't let us die for this man's life, and don't lay on us
innocent blood; for you, \textsc{Lord}, have done as it pleased you.''
\bibleverse{15} So they took up Jonah and threw him into the sea; and
the sea ceased its raging. \bibleverse{16} Then the men feared the
\textsc{Lord} exceedingly; and they offered a sacrifice to the
\textsc{Lord} and made vows. \bibleverse{17} The \textsc{Lord} prepared
a huge fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah was in the belly of the fish
three days and three nights.

\hypertarget{jonah-prayer-and-salvation}{%
\subsection{Jonah prayer and
salvation}\label{jonah-prayer-and-salvation}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} Then Jonah prayed to the \textsc{Lord}, his God, out of
the fish's belly. \bibleverse{2} He said, ``I called because of my
affliction to the \textsc{Lord}. He answered me. Out of the belly of
Sheol\footnote{\textbf{2:2} Sheol is the place of the dead.} I cried.
You heard my voice. \bibleverse{3} For you threw me into the depths, in
the heart of the seas. The flood was all around me. All your waves and
your billows passed over me. \bibleverse{4} I said, `I have been
banished from your sight; yet I will look again towards your holy
temple.' \bibleverse{5} The waters surrounded me, even to the soul. The
deep was around me. The weeds were wrapped around my head.
\bibleverse{6} I went down to the bottoms of the mountains. The earth
barred me in forever; yet you have brought my life up from the pit,
\textsc{Lord} my God. \bibleverse{7} ``When my soul fainted within me, I
remembered the \textsc{Lord}. My prayer came in to you, into your holy
temple. \bibleverse{8} Those who regard vain idols forsake their own
mercy. \bibleverse{9} But I will sacrifice to you with the voice of
thanksgiving. I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation belongs to
the \textsc{Lord}.'' \bibleverse{10} Then The \textsc{Lord} spoke to the
fish, and it vomited out Jonah on the dry land.

\hypertarget{jonah-successful-penitential-sermon-in-nineveh}{%
\subsection{Jonah successful penitential sermon in
Nineveh}\label{jonah-successful-penitential-sermon-in-nineveh}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} The \textsc{Lord}'s word came to Jonah the second time,
saying, \bibleverse{2} ``Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and
preach to it the message that I give you.'' \bibleverse{3} So Jonah
arose, and went to Nineveh, according to the \textsc{Lord}'s word. Now
Nineveh was an exceedingly great city, three days' journey across.
\bibleverse{4} Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey, and
he cried out, and said, ``In forty days, Nineveh will be overthrown!''
\bibleverse{5} The people of Nineveh believed God; and they proclaimed a
fast and put on sackcloth, from their greatest even to their least.
\bibleverse{6} The news reached the king of Nineveh, and he arose from
his throne, took off his royal robe, covered himself with sackcloth, and
sat in ashes. \bibleverse{7} He made a proclamation and published
through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, ``Let
neither man nor animal, herd nor flock, taste anything; let them not
feed, nor drink water; \bibleverse{8} but let them be covered with
sackcloth, both man and animal, and let them cry mightily to God. Yes,
let them turn everyone from his evil way and from the violence that is
in his hands. \bibleverse{9} Who knows whether God will not turn and
relent, and turn away from his fierce anger, so that we might not
perish?'' \bibleverse{10} God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way. God relented of the disaster which he said he would do
to them, and he didn't do it.

\hypertarget{jonah-disgust-and-rebuke}{%
\subsection{Jonah disgust and rebuke}\label{jonah-disgust-and-rebuke}}

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was angry.
\bibleverse{2} He prayed to the \textsc{Lord}, and said, ``Please,
\textsc{Lord}, wasn't this what I said when I was still in my own
country? Therefore I hurried to flee to Tarshish, for I knew that you
are a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in loving
kindness, and you relent of doing harm. \bibleverse{3} Therefore now,
\textsc{Lord}, take, I beg you, my life from me, for it is better for me
to die than to live.'' \bibleverse{4} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``Is it
right for you to be angry?'' \bibleverse{5} Then Jonah went out of the
city and sat on the east side of the city, and there made himself a
booth and sat under it in the shade, until he might see what would
become of the city. \bibleverse{6} The \textsc{Lord} God prepared a vine
and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shade over his
head to deliver him from his discomfort. So Jonah was exceedingly glad
because of the vine. \bibleverse{7} But God prepared a worm at dawn the
next day, and it chewed on the vine so that it withered. \bibleverse{8}
When the sun arose, God prepared a sultry east wind; and the sun beat on
Jonah's head, so that he was faint and requested for himself that he
might die. He said, ``It is better for me to die than to live.''
\bibleverse{9} God said to Jonah, ``Is it right for you to be angry
about the vine?'' He said, ``I am right to be angry, even to death.''
\bibleverse{10} The \textsc{Lord} said, ``You have been concerned for
the vine, for which you have not laboured, neither made it grow; which
came up in a night and perished in a night. \bibleverse{11} Shouldn't I
be concerned for Nineveh, that great city, in which are more than one
hundred and twenty thousand persons who can't discern between their
right hand and their left hand, and also many animals?''
