\hypertarget{the-lord-god-of-vengeance-and-grace-appears-at-the-judgment-of-nineveh}{%
\subsection{The Lord, God of vengeance and grace, appears at the
judgment of
Nineveh}\label{the-lord-god-of-vengeance-and-grace-appears-at-the-judgment-of-nineveh}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\hypertarget{the-coming-of-god-to-the-judgment-of-the-gentiles-as-well-as-of-israel-and-judah}{%
\subsection{The coming of God to the judgment of the Gentiles, as well
as of Israel and
Judah}\label{the-coming-of-god-to-the-judgment-of-the-gentiles-as-well-as-of-israel-and-judah}}

\bibleverse{1} The \textsc{Lord}'s\footnote{\textbf{1:1} When rendered
  in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS, ``\textsc{Lord}'' or ``GOD'' is the
  translation of God's Proper Name.} word that came to Micah of
Morasheth in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah,
which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. \bibleverse{2} Hear, you
peoples, all of you! Listen, O earth, and all that is therein. Let the
Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:2} The word translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''}
GOD be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.
\bibleverse{3} For behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:3} ``Behold'', from
  ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'', means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze
  at. It is often used as an interjection.} the \textsc{Lord} comes out
of his place, and will come down and tread on the high places of the
earth. \bibleverse{4} The mountains melt under him, and the valleys
split apart like wax before the fire, like waters that are poured down a
steep place. \bibleverse{5} ``All this is for the disobedience of Jacob,
and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the disobedience of
Jacob? Isn't it Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? Aren't
they Jerusalem?

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-fall-of-samaria}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the fall of
Samaria}\label{announcement-of-the-fall-of-samaria}}

\bibleverse{6} Therefore I will make Samaria like a rubble heap of the
field, like places for planting vineyards; and I will pour down its
stones into the valley, and I will uncover its foundations.
\bibleverse{7} All her idols will be beaten to pieces, all her temple
gifts will be burnt with fire, and I will destroy all her images; for of
the hire of a prostitute has she gathered them, and to the hire of a
prostitute shall they return.''

\hypertarget{micahs-denunciation-of-a-criminal-court-approaching-through-an-overwhelming-enemy}{%
\subsection{Micah's denunciation of a criminal court approaching through
an overwhelming
enemy}\label{micahs-denunciation-of-a-criminal-court-approaching-through-an-overwhelming-enemy}}

\bibleverse{8} For this I will lament and wail. I will go stripped and
naked. I will howl like the jackals and mourn like the ostriches.
\bibleverse{9} For her wounds are incurable; for it has come even to
Judah. It reaches to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{10} Don't tell it in Gath. Don't weep at all. At Beth
Ophrah\footnote{\textbf{1:10} Beth Ophrah means literally ``House of
  Dust.''} I have rolled myself in the dust. \bibleverse{11} Pass on,
inhabitant of Shaphir, in nakedness and shame. The inhabitant of Zaanan
won't come out. The wailing of Beth Ezel will take from you his
protection.

\hypertarget{the-threat-to-assyria-and-the-proclamation-of-the-salvation-of-judah}{%
\subsection{The threat to Assyria and the proclamation of the salvation
of
Judah}\label{the-threat-to-assyria-and-the-proclamation-of-the-salvation-of-judah}}

\bibleverse{12} For the inhabitant of Maroth waits anxiously for good,
because evil has come down from the \textsc{Lord} to the gate of
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{13} Harness the chariot to the swift steed,
inhabitant of Lachish. She was the beginning of sin to the daughter of
Zion; For the transgressions of Israel were found in you.
\bibleverse{14} Therefore you will give a parting gift to Moresheth
Gath. The houses of Achzib will be a deceitful thing to the kings of
Israel. \bibleverse{15} I will yet bring a conqueror to you, inhabitants
of Mareshah. The glory of Israel will come to Adullam. \bibleverse{16}
Shave your heads, and cut off your hair for the children of your
delight. Enlarge your baldness like the vulture, for they have gone into
captivity from you!

\hypertarget{siege-and-destruction-of-nineveh-as-a-result-of-divine-judgment}{%
\subsection{Siege and destruction of Nineveh as a result of divine
judgment}\label{siege-and-destruction-of-nineveh-as-a-result-of-divine-judgment}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\hypertarget{threats-to-the-very-rich-and-violent-and-to-the-opponents-of-the-prophet}{%
\subsection{Threats to the very rich and violent and to the opponents of
the
Prophet}\label{threats-to-the-very-rich-and-violent-and-to-the-opponents-of-the-prophet}}

\bibleverse{1} Woe to those who devise iniquity and work evil on their
beds! When the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the
power of their hand. \bibleverse{2} They covet fields and seize them,
and houses, then take them away. They oppress a man and his house, even
a man and his heritage. \bibleverse{3} Therefore the \textsc{Lord} says:
``Behold, I am planning against these people a disaster, from which you
will not remove your necks, neither will you walk haughtily, for it is
an evil time. \bibleverse{4} In that day they will take up a parable
against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, saying, `We are
utterly ruined! My people's possession is divided up. Indeed he takes it
from me and assigns our fields to traitors!'\,'' \bibleverse{5}
Therefore you will have no one who divides the land by lot in the
\textsc{Lord}'s assembly.

\hypertarget{micahs-argument-with-his-opponents-the-leaders-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{Micah's argument with his opponents, the leaders of the
people}\label{micahs-argument-with-his-opponents-the-leaders-of-the-people}}

\bibleverse{6} ``Don't prophesy!''---they prophesy--- ``Don't prophesy
about these things. Disgrace won't overtake us.'' \bibleverse{7} Shall
it be said, O house of Jacob, ``Is the \textsc{Lord}'s Spirit angry? Are
these his doings? Don't my words do good to him who walks blamelessly?''
\bibleverse{8} But lately my people have risen up as an enemy. You strip
the robe and clothing from those who pass by without a care, returning
from battle. \bibleverse{9} You drive the women of my people out from
their pleasant houses; from their young children you take away my
blessing forever. \bibleverse{10} Arise, and depart! For this is not
your resting place, because of uncleanness that destroys, even with a
grievous destruction. \bibleverse{11} If a man walking in a spirit of
falsehood lies, saying, ``I will prophesy to you of wine and of strong
drink,'' he would be the prophet of this people.

\hypertarget{gather-and-liberate-the-rest-of-israel}{%
\subsection{Gather and liberate the rest of
Israel}\label{gather-and-liberate-the-rest-of-israel}}

\bibleverse{12} I will surely assemble all of you, Jacob. I will surely
gather the remnant of Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of
Bozrah, as a flock in the middle of their pasture. They will swarm with
people. \bibleverse{13} He who breaks open the way goes up before them.
They break through the gate, and go out. Their king passes on before
them, with the \textsc{Lord} at their head.

\hypertarget{micahs-accusations-and-threats-against-the-violent-leaders-of-the-people-and-the-false-prophets}{%
\subsection{Micah's accusations and threats against the violent leaders
of the people and the false
prophets}\label{micahs-accusations-and-threats-against-the-violent-leaders-of-the-people-and-the-false-prophets}}

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\hypertarget{the-sins-and-punishment-of-the-cosmopolitan-city-of-nineveh-a-cry-of-woe-and-a-song-of-mockery}{%
\subsection{The sins and punishment of the cosmopolitan city of Nineveh:
a cry of woe and a song of
mockery}\label{the-sins-and-punishment-of-the-cosmopolitan-city-of-nineveh-a-cry-of-woe-and-a-song-of-mockery}}

\bibleverse{1} I said, ``Please listen, you heads of Jacob, and rulers
of the house of Israel: Isn't it for you to know justice? \bibleverse{2}
You who hate the good, and love the evil; who tear off their skin, and
their flesh from off their bones; \bibleverse{3} who also eat the flesh
of my people, and peel their skin from off them, and break their bones,
and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as meat within the
cauldron. \bibleverse{4} Then they will cry to the \textsc{Lord}, but he
will not answer them. Yes, he will hide his face from them at that time,
because they made their deeds evil.''

\hypertarget{threat-to-the-honeymoon-prophets-in-contrast-to-micah-the-prophet-filled-with-the-spirit-of-god}{%
\subsection{Threat to the honeymoon prophets in contrast to Micah, the
prophet filled with the spirit of
God}\label{threat-to-the-honeymoon-prophets-in-contrast-to-micah-the-prophet-filled-with-the-spirit-of-god}}

\bibleverse{5} The \textsc{Lord} says concerning the prophets who lead
my people astray---for those who feed their teeth, they proclaim,
``Peace!'' and whoever doesn't provide for their mouths, they prepare
war against him: \bibleverse{6} ``Therefore night is over you, with no
vision, and it is dark to you, that you may not divine; and the sun will
go down on the prophets, and the day will be black over them.
\bibleverse{7} The seers shall be disappointed, and the diviners
confounded. Yes, they shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer
from God.''\footnote{\textbf{3:7} The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is
  ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).}

\hypertarget{the-fall-of-the-city-is-inevitable}{%
\subsection{The fall of the city is
inevitable}\label{the-fall-of-the-city-is-inevitable}}

\bibleverse{8} But as for me, I am full of power by the \textsc{Lord}'s
Spirit, and of judgement, and of might, to declare to Jacob his
disobedience, and to Israel his sin.

\hypertarget{announcement-of-the-fall-of-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{Announcement of the fall of
Jerusalem}\label{announcement-of-the-fall-of-jerusalem}}

\bibleverse{9} Please listen to this, you heads of the house of Jacob,
and rulers of the house of Israel, who abhor justice, and pervert all
equity, \bibleverse{10} who build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity. \bibleverse{11} Her leaders judge for bribes, and her priests
teach for a price, and her prophets of it tell fortunes for money; yet
they lean on the \textsc{Lord}, and say, ``Isn't the \textsc{Lord}
amongst us? No disaster will come on us.'' \bibleverse{12} Therefore
Zion for your sake will be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem will
become heaps of rubble, and the mountain of the temple like the high
places of a forest.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} But in the latter days, it will happen that the mountain
of the \textsc{Lord}'s temple will be established on the top of the
mountains, and it will be exalted above the hills; and peoples will
stream to it. \bibleverse{2} Many nations will go and say, ``Come! Let's
go up to the mountain of the \textsc{Lord}, and to the house of the God
of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths.'' For the law will go out of Zion, and the \textsc{Lord}'s word
from Jerusalem; \bibleverse{3} and he will judge between many peoples,
and will decide concerning strong nations afar off. They will beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation
will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war any
more. \bibleverse{4} But every man will sit under his vine and under his
fig tree. No one will make them afraid, for the mouth of the
\textsc{Lord} of Armies has spoken. \bibleverse{5} Indeed all the
nations may walk in the name of their gods, but we will walk in the name
of the \textsc{Lord} our God forever and ever. \bibleverse{6} ``In that
day,'' says the \textsc{Lord}, ``I will assemble that which is lame, and
I will gather that which is driven away, and that which I have
afflicted; \bibleverse{7} and I will make that which was lame a remnant,
and that which was cast far off a strong nation: and the \textsc{Lord}
will reign over them on Mount Zion from then on, even forever.''
\bibleverse{8} You, tower of the flock, the hill of the daughter of
Zion, to you it will come. Yes, the former dominion will come, the
kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem. \bibleverse{9} Now why do you cry
out aloud? Is there no king in you? Has your counsellor perished, that
pains have taken hold of you as of a woman in travail? \bibleverse{10}
Be in pain, and labour to give birth, daughter of Zion, like a woman in
travail; for now you will go out of the city, and will dwell in the
field, and will come even to Babylon. There you will be rescued. There
the \textsc{Lord} will redeem you from the hand of your enemies.
\bibleverse{11} Now many nations have assembled against you, that say,
``Let her be defiled, and let our eye gloat over Zion.'' \bibleverse{12}
But they don't know the thoughts of the \textsc{Lord}, neither do they
understand his counsel; for he has gathered them like the sheaves to the
threshing floor. \bibleverse{13} Arise and thresh, daughter of Zion, for
I will make your horn iron, and I will make your hoofs bronze. You will
beat in pieces many peoples. I will devote their gain to the
\textsc{Lord}, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Now you shall gather yourself in troops, daughter of
troops. He has laid siege against us. They will strike the judge of
Israel with a rod on the cheek. \bibleverse{2} But you, Bethlehem
Ephrathah, being small amongst the clans of Judah, out of you one will
come out to me who is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings out are from
of old, from ancient times. \bibleverse{3} Therefore he will abandon
them until the time that she who is in labour gives birth. Then the rest
of his brothers will return to the children of Israel. \bibleverse{4} He
shall stand, and shall shepherd in the strength of the \textsc{Lord}, in
the majesty of the name of the \textsc{Lord} his God. They will live,
for then he will be great to the ends of the earth. \bibleverse{5} He
will be our peace when Assyria invades our land and when he marches
through our fortresses, then we will raise against him seven shepherds,
and eight leaders of men. \bibleverse{6} They will rule the land of
Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in its gates. He will
deliver us from the Assyrian, when he invades our land, and when he
marches within our border. \bibleverse{7} The remnant of Jacob will be
amongst many peoples like dew from the \textsc{Lord}, like showers on
the grass, that don't wait for man nor wait for the sons of men.
\bibleverse{8} The remnant of Jacob will be amongst the nations, amongst
many peoples, like a lion amongst the animals of the forest, like a
young lion amongst the flocks of sheep; who, if he goes through, treads
down and tears in pieces, and there is no one to deliver. \bibleverse{9}
Let your hand be lifted up above your adversaries, and let all of your
enemies be cut off. \bibleverse{10} ``It will happen in that day'', says
the \textsc{Lord}, ``that I will cut off your horses from amongst you
and will destroy your chariots. \bibleverse{11} I will cut off the
cities of your land and will tear down all your strongholds.
\bibleverse{12} I will destroy witchcraft from your hand. You shall have
no soothsayers. \bibleverse{13} I will cut off your engraved images and
your pillars from amongst you; and you shall no more worship the work of
your hands. \bibleverse{14} I will uproot your Asherah poles from
amongst you; and I will destroy your cities. \bibleverse{15} I will
execute vengeance in anger and wrath on the nations that didn't
listen.''

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Listen now to what the \textsc{Lord} says: ``Arise, plead
your case before the mountains, and let the hills hear what you have to
say. \bibleverse{2} Hear, you mountains, the \textsc{Lord}'s indictment,
and you enduring foundations of the earth; for the \textsc{Lord} has a
case against his people, and he will contend with Israel. \bibleverse{3}
My people, what have I done to you? How have I burdened you? Answer me!
\bibleverse{4} For I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and
redeemed you out of the house of bondage. I sent before you Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam. \bibleverse{5} My people, remember now what Balak
king of Moab devised, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from
Shittim to Gilgal, that you may know the righteous acts of the
\textsc{Lord}.'' \bibleverse{6} How shall I come before the
\textsc{Lord}, and bow myself before the exalted God? Shall I come
before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old? \bibleverse{7}
Will the \textsc{Lord} be pleased with thousands of rams? With tens of
thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my
disobedience? The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
\bibleverse{8} He has shown you, O man, what is good. What does the
\textsc{Lord} require of you, but to act justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with your God? \bibleverse{9} The \textsc{Lord}'s voice
calls to the city--- and wisdom fears your name--- ``Listen to the rod,
and he who appointed it. \bibleverse{10} Are there yet treasures of
wickedness in the house of the wicked, and a short ephah\footnote{\textbf{6:10}
  An ephah is a measure of volume (about 22 litres or about 2/3 of a
  bushel), and a short ephah is made smaller than a full ephah for the
  purpose of cheating customers.} that is accursed? \bibleverse{11}
Shall I tolerate dishonest scales, and a bag of deceitful weights?
\bibleverse{12} Her rich men are full of violence, her inhabitants speak
lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their speech. \bibleverse{13}
Therefore I also have struck you with a grievous wound. I have made you
desolate because of your sins. \bibleverse{14} You shall eat, but not be
satisfied. Your hunger will be within you. You will store up, but not
save, and that which you save I will give up to the sword.
\bibleverse{15} You will sow, but won't reap. You will tread the olives,
but won't anoint yourself with oil; and crush grapes, but won't drink
the wine. \bibleverse{16} For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the
works of Ahab's house. You walk in their counsels, that I may make you a
ruin, and your inhabitants a hissing. You will bear the reproach of my
people.''

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} Misery is mine! Indeed, I am like one who gathers the
summer fruits, as gleanings of the vineyard. There is no cluster of
grapes to eat. My soul desires to eat the early fig. \bibleverse{2} The
godly man has perished out of the earth, and there is no one upright
amongst men. They all lie in wait for blood; every man hunts his brother
with a net. \bibleverse{3} Their hands are on that which is evil to do
it diligently. The ruler and judge ask for a bribe. The powerful man
dictates the evil desire of his soul. Thus they conspire together.
\bibleverse{4} The best of them is like a brier. The most upright is
worse than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen, even your
visitation, has come; now is the time of their confusion. \bibleverse{5}
Don't trust in a neighbour. Don't put confidence in a friend. With the
woman lying in your embrace, be careful of the words of your mouth!
\bibleverse{6} For the son dishonours the father, the daughter rises up
against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a
man's enemies are the men of his own house. \bibleverse{7} But as for
me, I will look to the \textsc{Lord}. I will wait for the God of my
salvation. My God will hear me. \bibleverse{8} Don't rejoice against me,
my enemy. When I fall, I will arise. When I sit in darkness, the
\textsc{Lord} will be a light to me. \bibleverse{9} I will bear the
indignation of the \textsc{Lord}, because I have sinned against him,
until he pleads my case and executes judgement for me. He will bring me
out to the light. I will see his righteousness. \bibleverse{10} Then my
enemy will see it, and shame will cover her who said to me, ``Where is
the \textsc{Lord} your God?'' My eyes will see her. Now she will be
trodden down like the mire of the streets. \bibleverse{11} A day to
build your walls! In that day, he will extend your boundary.
\bibleverse{12} In that day they will come to you from Assyria and the
cities of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and from sea to sea,
and mountain to mountain. \bibleverse{13} Yet the land will be desolate
because of those who dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.
\bibleverse{14} Shepherd your people with your staff, the flock of your
heritage, who dwell by themselves in a forest. Let them feed in the
middle of fertile pasture land, in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of
old. \bibleverse{15} ``As in the days of your coming out of the land of
Egypt, I will show them marvellous things.'' \bibleverse{16} The nations
will see and be ashamed of all their might. They will lay their hand on
their mouth. Their ears will be deaf. \bibleverse{17} They will lick the
dust like a serpent. Like crawling things of the earth, they will come
trembling out of their dens. They will come with fear to the
\textsc{Lord} our God, and will be afraid because of you.

\hypertarget{a-dirge-in-nineveh}{%
\subsection{A dirge in Nineveh}\label{a-dirge-in-nineveh}}

\hypertarget{exalted-zion-and-the-future-glory-of-general-peace-among-nations}{%
\subsection{Exalted Zion and the future glory of general peace among
nations}\label{exalted-zion-and-the-future-glory-of-general-peace-among-nations}}

\hypertarget{gather-the-scattered-and-heal-the-sick-under-the-rule-of-god}{%
\subsection{Gather the scattered and heal the sick under the rule of
God}\label{gather-the-scattered-and-heal-the-sick-under-the-rule-of-god}}

\hypertarget{the-royal-city-of-jerusalem-now-in-need-but-destined-for-glory}{%
\subsection{The royal city of Jerusalem, now in need but destined for
glory}\label{the-royal-city-of-jerusalem-now-in-need-but-destined-for-glory}}

\hypertarget{the-new-david-of-the-future-of-bethlehem-his-people-and-his-time-of-peace}{%
\subsection{The new David of the future of Bethlehem, his people and his
time of
peace}\label{the-new-david-of-the-future-of-bethlehem-his-people-and-his-time-of-peace}}

\hypertarget{battle-victories-of-the-israelites-against-assyria}{%
\subsection{Battle victories of the Israelites against
Assyria}\label{battle-victories-of-the-israelites-against-assyria}}

\hypertarget{the-supremacy-of-israel-among-the-peoples}{%
\subsection{The supremacy of Israel among the
peoples}\label{the-supremacy-of-israel-among-the-peoples}}

\hypertarget{the-purification-of-the-land-and-the-purification-of-the-people}{%
\subsection{The purification of the land and the purification of the
people}\label{the-purification-of-the-land-and-the-purification-of-the-people}}

\hypertarget{gods-dispute-with-his-ungrateful-people}{%
\subsection{God's dispute with his ungrateful
people}\label{gods-dispute-with-his-ungrateful-people}}

\hypertarget{the-peoples-penance-confession}{%
\subsection{The people's penance
confession}\label{the-peoples-penance-confession}}

\hypertarget{the-crushing-judgment-on-the-dishonesty-of-the-people-of-jerusalem}{%
\subsection{The crushing judgment on the dishonesty of the people of
Jerusalem}\label{the-crushing-judgment-on-the-dishonesty-of-the-people-of-jerusalem}}

\hypertarget{bitter-complaints-about-general-depravity}{%
\subsection{Bitter complaints about general
depravity}\label{bitter-complaints-about-general-depravity}}

\hypertarget{prayer-of-penance-and-hope-of-the-church-and-consoling-promise-of-god}{%
\subsection{Prayer of penance and hope of the church and consoling
promise of
God}\label{prayer-of-penance-and-hope-of-the-church-and-consoling-promise-of-god}}

\hypertarget{ask-the-people-to-grant-you-the-fertile-parts-of-the-country-and-the-promise-of-gods-grace}{%
\subsection{Ask the people to grant you the fertile parts of the country
and the promise of God's
grace}\label{ask-the-people-to-grant-you-the-fertile-parts-of-the-country-and-the-promise-of-gods-grace}}

\hypertarget{confession-of-trust-in-the-grace-of-god}{%
\subsection{Confession of trust in the grace of
God}\label{confession-of-trust-in-the-grace-of-god}}

\bibleverse{18} Who is a God like you, who pardons iniquity, and passes
over the disobedience of the remnant of his heritage? He doesn't retain
his anger forever, because he delights in loving kindness.
\bibleverse{19} He will again have compassion on us. He will tread our
iniquities under foot. You will cast all their sins into the depths of
the sea. \bibleverse{20} You will give truth to Jacob, and mercy to
Abraham, as you have sworn to our fathers from the days of old.
