\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} The vision of Obadiah. This is what the Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  The word translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} GOD\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  When rendered in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS, ``LORD'' or ``GOD'' is the
  translation of God's Proper Name.} says about Edom. We have heard news
from the LORD, and an ambassador is sent amongst the nations, saying,
``Arise, and let's rise up against her in battle. \bibleverse{2}
Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:2} ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look
  at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an
  interjection.} I have made you small amongst the nations. You are
greatly despised. \bibleverse{3} The pride of your heart has deceived
you, you who dwell in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high,
who says in his heart, `Who will bring me down to the ground?'
\bibleverse{4} Though you mount on high as the eagle, and though your
nest is set amongst the stars, I will bring you down from there,'' says
the LORD. \bibleverse{5} ``If thieves came to you, if robbers by
night---oh, what disaster awaits you---wouldn't they only steal until
they had enough? If grape pickers came to you, wouldn't they leave some
gleaning grapes? \bibleverse{6} How Esau will be ransacked! How his
hidden treasures are sought out! \bibleverse{7} All the men of your
alliance have brought you on your way, even to the border. The men who
were at peace with you have deceived you, and prevailed against you.
Friends who eat your bread lay a snare under you. There is no
understanding in him.''

\bibleverse{8} ``Won't I in that day'', says the LORD, ``destroy the
wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the mountain of Esau?
\bibleverse{9} Your mighty men, Teman, will be dismayed, to the end that
everyone may be cut off from the mountain of Esau by slaughter.
\bibleverse{10} For the violence done to your brother Jacob, shame will
cover you, and you will be cut off forever. \bibleverse{11} In the day
that you stood on the other side, in the day that strangers carried away
his substance and foreigners entered into his gates and cast lots for
Jerusalem, even you were like one of them. \bibleverse{12} But don't
look down on your brother in the day of his disaster, and don't rejoice
over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction. Don't speak
proudly in the day of distress. \bibleverse{13} Don't enter into the
gate of my people in the day of their calamity. Don't look down on their
affliction in the day of their calamity, neither seize their wealth on
the day of their calamity. \bibleverse{14} Don't stand in the crossroads
to cut off those of his who escape. Don't deliver up those of his who
remain in the day of distress. \bibleverse{15} For the day of the LORD
is near all the nations! As you have done, it will be done to you. Your
deeds will return upon your own head. \bibleverse{16} For as you have
drunk on my holy mountain, so all the nations will drink continually.
Yes, they will drink, swallow down, and will be as though they had not
been. \bibleverse{17} But in Mount Zion, there will be those who escape,
and it will be holy. The house of Jacob will possess their possessions.
\bibleverse{18} The house of Jacob will be a fire, the house of Joseph a
flame, and the house of Esau for stubble. They will burn amongst them
and devour them. There will not be any remaining to the house of Esau.''
Indeed, the LORD has spoken.

\bibleverse{19} Those of the South will possess the mountain of Esau,
and those of the lowland, the Philistines. They will possess the field
of Ephraim, and the field of Samaria. Benjamin will possess Gilead.
\bibleverse{20} The captives of this army of the children of Israel, who
are amongst the Canaanites, will possess even to Zarephath; and the
captives of Jerusalem, who are in Sepharad, will possess the cities of
the Negev. \bibleverse{21} Saviours will go up on Mount Zion to judge
the mountains of Esau, and the kingdom will be the LORD's.
