\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} The LORD's\footnote{1:1 When rendered in ALL CAPITAL
  LETTERS, ``LORD'' or ``GOD'' is the translation of God's Proper Name.}
word that came to Micah of Morasheth in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.
\bibverse{2} Hear, you peoples, all of you! Listen, O earth, and all
that is therein. Let the Lord+ 1:2 The word translated ``Lord'' is
``Adonai.'' GOD be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.
\bibverse{3} For behold,+ 1:3 ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look
at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an
interjection. the LORD comes out of his place, and will come down and
tread on the high places of the earth. \bibverse{4} The mountains melt
under him, and the valleys split apart like wax before the fire, like
waters that are poured down a steep place. \bibverse{5} ``All this is
for the disobedience of Jacob, and for the sins of the house of Israel.
What is the disobedience of Jacob? Isn't it Samaria? And what are the
high places of Judah? Aren't they Jerusalem? \bibverse{6} Therefore I
will make Samaria like a rubble heap of the field, like places for
planting vineyards; and I will pour down its stones into the valley, and
I will uncover its foundations. \bibverse{7} All her idols will be
beaten to pieces, all her temple gifts will be burnt with fire, and I
will destroy all her images; for of the hire of a prostitute has she
gathered them, and to the hire of a prostitute shall they return.''
\bibverse{8} For this I will lament and wail. I will go stripped and
naked. I will howl like the jackals and mourn like the ostriches.
\bibverse{9} For her wounds are incurable; for it has come even to
Judah. It reaches to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
\bibverse{10} Don't tell it in Gath. Don't weep at all. At Beth Ophrah+
1:10 Beth Ophrah means literally ``House of Dust.'' I have rolled myself
in the dust. \bibverse{11} Pass on, inhabitant of Shaphir, in nakedness
and shame. The inhabitant of Zaanan won't come out. The wailing of Beth
Ezel will take from you his protection. \bibverse{12} For the inhabitant
of Maroth waits anxiously for good, because evil has come down from the
LORD to the gate of Jerusalem. \bibverse{13} Harness the chariot to the
swift steed, inhabitant of Lachish. She was the beginning of sin to the
daughter of Zion; For the transgressions of Israel were found in you.
\bibverse{14} Therefore you will give a parting gift to Moresheth Gath.
The houses of Achzib will be a deceitful thing to the kings of Israel.
\bibverse{15} I will yet bring a conqueror to you, inhabitants of
Mareshah. The glory of Israel will come to Adullam. \bibverse{16} Shave
your heads, and cut off your hair for the children of your delight.
Enlarge your baldness like the vulture, for they have gone into
captivity from you!

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} Woe to those who devise iniquity and work evil on their
beds! When the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the
power of their hand. \bibverse{2} They covet fields and seize them, and
houses, then take them away. They oppress a man and his house, even a
man and his heritage. \bibverse{3} Therefore the LORD says: ``Behold, I
am planning against these people a disaster, from which you will not
remove your necks, neither will you walk haughtily, for it is an evil
time. \bibverse{4} In that day they will take up a parable against you,
and lament with a doleful lamentation, saying, `We are utterly ruined!
My people's possession is divided up. Indeed he takes it from me and
assigns our fields to traitors!'\,'' \bibverse{5} Therefore you will
have no one who divides the land by lot in the LORD's assembly.
\bibverse{6} ``Don't prophesy!''---they prophesy--- ``Don't prophesy
about these things. Disgrace won't overtake us.'' \bibverse{7} Shall it
be said, O house of Jacob, ``Is the LORD's Spirit angry? Are these his
doings? Don't my words do good to him who walks blamelessly?''
\bibverse{8} But lately my people have risen up as an enemy. You strip
the robe and clothing from those who pass by without a care, returning
from battle. \bibverse{9} You drive the women of my people out from
their pleasant houses; from their young children you take away my
blessing forever. \bibverse{10} Arise, and depart! For this is not your
resting place, because of uncleanness that destroys, even with a
grievous destruction. \bibverse{11} If a man walking in a spirit of
falsehood lies, saying, ``I will prophesy to you of wine and of strong
drink,'' he would be the prophet of this people. \bibverse{12} I will
surely assemble all of you, Jacob. I will surely gather the remnant of
Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as a flock in
the middle of their pasture. They will swarm with people. \bibverse{13}
He who breaks open the way goes up before them. They break through the
gate, and go out. Their king passes on before them, with the LORD at
their head.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} I said, ``Please listen, you heads of Jacob, and rulers of
the house of Israel: Isn't it for you to know justice? \bibverse{2} You
who hate the good, and love the evil; who tear off their skin, and their
flesh from off their bones; \bibverse{3} who also eat the flesh of my
people, and peel their skin from off them, and break their bones, and
chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as meat within the cauldron.
\bibverse{4} Then they will cry to the LORD, but he will not answer
them. Yes, he will hide his face from them at that time, because they
made their deeds evil.''

\bibverse{5} The LORD says concerning the prophets who lead my people
astray---for those who feed their teeth, they proclaim, ``Peace!'' and
whoever doesn't provide for their mouths, they prepare war against him:
\bibverse{6} ``Therefore night is over you, with no vision, and it is
dark to you, that you may not divine; and the sun will go down on the
prophets, and the day will be black over them. \bibverse{7} The seers
shall be disappointed, and the diviners confounded. Yes, they shall all
cover their lips, for there is no answer from God.''\footnote{3:7 The
  Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``אֱלֹהִ֑ים'' (Elohim).} \bibverse{8}
But as for me, I am full of power by the LORD's Spirit, and of
judgement, and of might, to declare to Jacob his disobedience, and to
Israel his sin. \bibverse{9} Please listen to this, you heads of the
house of Jacob, and rulers of the house of Israel, who abhor justice,
and pervert all equity, \bibverse{10} who build up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity. \bibverse{11} Her leaders judge for bribes, and
her priests teach for a price, and her prophets of it tell fortunes for
money; yet they lean on the LORD, and say, ``Isn't the LORD amongst us?
No disaster will come on us.'' \bibverse{12} Therefore Zion for your
sake will be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem will become heaps of
rubble, and the mountain of the temple like the high places of a forest.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} But in the latter days, it will happen that the mountain of
the LORD's temple will be established on the top of the mountains, and
it will be exalted above the hills; and peoples will stream to it.
\bibverse{2} Many nations will go and say, ``Come! Let's go up to the
mountain of the LORD, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.'' For the law will
go out of Zion, and the LORD's word from Jerusalem; \bibverse{3} and he
will judge between many peoples, and will decide concerning strong
nations afar off. They will beat their swords into ploughshares, and
their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will not lift up sword against
nation, neither will they learn war any more. \bibverse{4} But every man
will sit under his vine and under his fig tree. No one will make them
afraid, for the mouth of the LORD of Armies has spoken. \bibverse{5}
Indeed all the nations may walk in the name of their gods, but we will
walk in the name of the LORD our God forever and ever. \bibverse{6} ``In
that day,'' says the LORD, ``I will assemble that which is lame, and I
will gather that which is driven away, and that which I have afflicted;
\bibverse{7} and I will make that which was lame a remnant, and that
which was cast far off a strong nation: and the LORD will reign over
them on Mount Zion from then on, even forever.'' \bibverse{8} You, tower
of the flock, the hill of the daughter of Zion, to you it will come.
Yes, the former dominion will come, the kingdom of the daughter of
Jerusalem. \bibverse{9} Now why do you cry out aloud? Is there no king
in you? Has your counsellor perished, that pains have taken hold of you
as of a woman in travail? \bibverse{10} Be in pain, and labour to give
birth, daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail; for now you will go
out of the city, and will dwell in the field, and will come even to
Babylon. There you will be rescued. There the LORD will redeem you from
the hand of your enemies. \bibverse{11} Now many nations have assembled
against you, that say, ``Let her be defiled, and let our eye gloat over
Zion.'' \bibverse{12} But they don't know the thoughts of the LORD,
neither do they understand his counsel; for he has gathered them like
the sheaves to the threshing floor. \bibverse{13} Arise and thresh,
daughter of Zion, for I will make your horn iron, and I will make your
hoofs bronze. You will beat in pieces many peoples. I will devote their
gain to the LORD, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth. \#
5 \bibverse{1} Now you shall gather yourself in troops, daughter of
troops. He has laid siege against us. They will strike the judge of
Israel with a rod on the cheek. \bibverse{2} But you, Bethlehem
Ephrathah, being small amongst the clans of Judah, out of you one will
come out to me who is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings out are from
of old, from ancient times. \bibverse{3} Therefore he will abandon them
until the time that she who is in labour gives birth. Then the rest of
his brothers will return to the children of Israel. \bibverse{4} He
shall stand, and shall shepherd in the strength of the LORD, in the
majesty of the name of the LORD his God. They will live, for then he
will be great to the ends of the earth. \bibverse{5} He will be our
peace when Assyria invades our land and when he marches through our
fortresses, then we will raise against him seven shepherds, and eight
leaders of men. \bibverse{6} They will rule the land of Assyria with the
sword, and the land of Nimrod in its gates. He will deliver us from the
Assyrian, when he invades our land, and when he marches within our
border. \bibverse{7} The remnant of Jacob will be amongst many peoples
like dew from the LORD, like showers on the grass, that don't wait for
man nor wait for the sons of men. \bibverse{8} The remnant of Jacob will
be amongst the nations, amongst many peoples, like a lion amongst the
animals of the forest, like a young lion amongst the flocks of sheep;
who, if he goes through, treads down and tears in pieces, and there is
no one to deliver. \bibverse{9} Let your hand be lifted up above your
adversaries, and let all of your enemies be cut off. \bibverse{10} ``It
will happen in that day'', says the LORD, ``that I will cut off your
horses from amongst you and will destroy your chariots. \bibverse{11} I
will cut off the cities of your land and will tear down all your
strongholds. \bibverse{12} I will destroy witchcraft from your hand. You
shall have no soothsayers. \bibverse{13} I will cut off your engraved
images and your pillars from amongst you; and you shall no more worship
the work of your hands. \bibverse{14} I will uproot your Asherah poles
from amongst you; and I will destroy your cities. \bibverse{15} I will
execute vengeance in anger and wrath on the nations that didn't
listen.''

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{6}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} Listen now to what the LORD says: ``Arise, plead your case
before the mountains, and let the hills hear what you have to say.
\bibverse{2} Hear, you mountains, the LORD's indictment, and you
enduring foundations of the earth; for the LORD has a case against his
people, and he will contend with Israel. \bibverse{3} My people, what
have I done to you? How have I burdened you? Answer me! \bibverse{4} For
I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the
house of bondage. I sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
\bibverse{5} My people, remember now what Balak king of Moab devised,
and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim to Gilgal,
that you may know the righteous acts of the LORD.'' \bibverse{6} How
shall I come before the LORD, and bow myself before the exalted God?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old?
\bibverse{7} Will the LORD be pleased with thousands of rams? With tens
of thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my
disobedience? The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? \bibverse{8}
He has shown you, O man, what is good. What does the LORD require of
you, but to act justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God?
\bibverse{9} The LORD's voice calls to the city--- and wisdom fears your
name--- ``Listen to the rod, and he who appointed it. \bibverse{10} Are
there yet treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and a
short ephah\footnote{6:10 An ephah is a measure of volume (about 22
  litres or about 2/3 of a bushel), and a short ephah is made smaller
  than a full ephah for the purpose of cheating customers.} that is
accursed? \bibverse{11} Shall I tolerate dishonest scales, and a bag of
deceitful weights? \bibverse{12} Her rich men are full of violence, her
inhabitants speak lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their speech.
\bibverse{13} Therefore I also have struck you with a grievous wound. I
have made you desolate because of your sins. \bibverse{14} You shall
eat, but not be satisfied. Your hunger will be within you. You will
store up, but not save, and that which you save I will give up to the
sword. \bibverse{15} You will sow, but won't reap. You will tread the
olives, but won't anoint yourself with oil; and crush grapes, but won't
drink the wine. \bibverse{16} For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all
the works of Ahab's house. You walk in their counsels, that I may make
you a ruin, and your inhabitants a hissing. You will bear the reproach
of my people.''

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{7}\label{section-5}}

\bibverse{1} Misery is mine! Indeed, I am like one who gathers the
summer fruits, as gleanings of the vineyard. There is no cluster of
grapes to eat. My soul desires to eat the early fig.~\bibverse{2} The
godly man has perished out of the earth, and there is no one upright
amongst men. They all lie in wait for blood; every man hunts his brother
with a net. \bibverse{3} Their hands are on that which is evil to do it
diligently. The ruler and judge ask for a bribe. The powerful man
dictates the evil desire of his soul. Thus they conspire together.
\bibverse{4} The best of them is like a brier. The most upright is worse
than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen, even your visitation, has
come; now is the time of their confusion. \bibverse{5} Don't trust in a
neighbour. Don't put confidence in a friend. With the woman lying in
your embrace, be careful of the words of your mouth! \bibverse{6} For
the son dishonours the father, the daughter rises up against her mother,
the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a man's enemies are the
men of his own house. \bibverse{7} But as for me, I will look to the
LORD. I will wait for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.
\bibverse{8} Don't rejoice against me, my enemy. When I fall, I will
arise. When I sit in darkness, the LORD will be a light to me.
\bibverse{9} I will bear the indignation of the LORD, because I have
sinned against him, until he pleads my case and executes judgement for
me. He will bring me out to the light. I will see his righteousness.
\bibverse{10} Then my enemy will see it, and shame will cover her who
said to me, ``Where is the LORD your God?'' My eyes will see her. Now
she will be trodden down like the mire of the streets. \bibverse{11} A
day to build your walls! In that day, he will extend your boundary.
\bibverse{12} In that day they will come to you from Assyria and the
cities of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and from sea to sea,
and mountain to mountain. \bibverse{13} Yet the land will be desolate
because of those who dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.
\bibverse{14} Shepherd your people with your staff, the flock of your
heritage, who dwell by themselves in a forest. Let them feed in the
middle of fertile pasture land, in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of
old. \bibverse{15} ``As in the days of your coming out of the land of
Egypt, I will show them marvellous things.'' \bibverse{16} The nations
will see and be ashamed of all their might. They will lay their hand on
their mouth. Their ears will be deaf. \bibverse{17} They will lick the
dust like a serpent. Like crawling things of the earth, they will come
trembling out of their dens. They will come with fear to the LORD our
God, and will be afraid because of you. \bibverse{18} Who is a God like
you, who pardons iniquity, and passes over the disobedience of the
remnant of his heritage? He doesn't retain his anger forever, because he
delights in loving kindness. \bibverse{19} He will again have compassion
on us. He will tread our iniquities under foot. You will cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea. \bibverse{20} You will give truth to
Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as you have sworn to our fathers from the
days of old.
