\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month,
in the first day of the month, the LORD's\footnote{1:1 When rendered in
  ALL CAPITAL LETTERS, ``LORD'' or ``GOD'' is the translation of God's
  Proper Name.} word came by Haggai the prophet, to Zerubbabel the son
of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the
high priest, saying, \bibverse{2} ``This is what the LORD of Armies
says: These people say, `The time hasn't yet come, the time for the
LORD's house to be built.'\,''

\bibverse{3} Then the LORD's word came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
\bibverse{4} ``Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in your panelled
houses, while this house lies waste? \bibverse{5} Now therefore this is
what the LORD of Armies says: `Consider your ways. \bibverse{6} You have
sown much, and bring in little. You eat, but you don't have enough. You
drink, but you aren't filled with drink. You clothe yourselves, but no
one is warm; and he who earns wages earns wages to put them into a bag
with holes in it.'

\bibverse{7} ``This is what the LORD of Armies says: `Consider your
ways. \bibverse{8} Go up to the mountain, bring wood, and build the
house. I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified,'' says the
LORD. \bibverse{9} ``You looked for much, and, behold,\footnote{1:9
  ``Behold'', from ``הִנֵּה'', means look at, take notice, observe, see,
  or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} it came to little;
and when you brought it home, I blew it away. Why?'' says the LORD of
Armies, ``Because of my house that lies waste, while each of you is busy
with his own house. \bibverse{10} Therefore for your sake the heavens
withhold the dew, and the earth withholds its fruit. \bibverse{11} I
called for a drought on the land, on the mountains, on the grain, on the
new wine, on the oil, on that which the ground produces, on men, on
livestock, and on all the labour of the hands.''

\bibverse{12} Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshua the son of
Jehozadak, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed
the LORD their God's\footnote{1:12 The Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is
  ``אֱלֹהִ֑ים'' (Elohim).} voice, and the words of Haggai the prophet,
as the LORD their God, had sent him; and the people feared the LORD.

\bibverse{13} Then Haggai, the LORD's messenger, spoke the LORD's
message to the people, saying, ``I am with you,'' says the LORD.

\bibverse{14} The LORD stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of
Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the
people; and they came and worked on the house of the LORD of Armies,
their God, \bibverse{15} in the twenty-fourth day of the month, in the
sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} In the seventh month, in the twenty-first day of the month,
the LORD's word came by Haggai the prophet, saying, \bibverse{2} ``Speak
now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua
the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to the remnant of the people,
saying, \bibverse{3} `Who is left amongst you who saw this house in its
former glory? How do you see it now? Isn't it in your eyes as nothing?
\bibverse{4} Yet now be strong, Zerubbabel,' says the LORD. `Be strong,
Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest. Be strong, all you people of
the land,' says the LORD, `and work, for I am with you,' says the LORD
of Armies. \bibverse{5} This is the word that I covenanted with you when
you came out of Egypt, and my Spirit lived amongst you. `Don't be
afraid.' \bibverse{6} For this is what the LORD of Armies says: `Yet
once more, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, the
earth, the sea, and the dry land; \bibverse{7} and I will shake all
nations. The treasure of all nations will come, and I will fill this
house with glory, says the LORD of Armies. \bibverse{8} The silver is
mine, and the gold is mine,' says the LORD of Armies. \bibverse{9} `The
latter glory of this house will be greater than the former,' says the
LORD of Armies; `and in this place I will give peace,' says the LORD of
Armies.''

\bibverse{10} In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second
year of Darius, the LORD's word came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
\bibverse{11} ``The LORD of Armies says: Ask now the priests concerning
the law, saying, \bibverse{12} `If someone carries holy meat in the fold
of his garment, and with his fold touches bread, stew, wine, oil, or any
food, will it become holy?'\,''

The priests answered, ``No.''

\bibverse{13} Then Haggai said, ``If one who is unclean by reason of a
dead body touch any of these, will it be unclean?''

The priests answered, ``It will be unclean.''

\bibverse{14} Then Haggai answered, ``\,`So is this people, and so is
this nation before me,' says the LORD; `and so is every work of their
hands. That which they offer there is unclean. \bibverse{15} Now, please
consider from this day and backward, before a stone was laid on a stone
in the LORD's temple. \bibverse{16} Through all that time, when one came
to a heap of twenty measures, there were only ten. When one came to the
wine vat to draw out fifty, there were only twenty. \bibverse{17} I
struck you with blight, mildew, and hail in all the work of your hands;
yet you didn't turn to me,' says the LORD. \bibverse{18} `Consider,
please, from this day and backward, from the twenty-fourth day of the
ninth month, since the day that the foundation of the LORD's temple was
laid, consider it. \bibverse{19} Is the seed yet in the barn? Yes, the
vine, the fig tree, the pomegranate, and the olive tree haven't
produced. From today I will bless you.'\,''

\bibverse{20} The LORD's word came the second time to Haggai in the
twenty-fourth day of the month, saying, \bibverse{21} ``Speak to
Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, `I will shake the heavens and the
earth. \bibverse{22} I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms. I will
destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations. I will overthrow
the chariots and those who ride in them. The horses and their riders
will come down, everyone by the sword of his brother. \bibverse{23} In
that day, says the LORD of Armies, I will take you, Zerubbabel my
servant, the son of Shealtiel,' says the LORD, `and will make you like a
signet ring, for I have chosen you,' says the LORD of Armies.''
