\hypertarget{gods-love-for-israel-in-contrast-to-his-treatment-of-the-sister-nation-of-edom}{%
\subsection{God's love for Israel in contrast to his treatment of the
sister nation of
Edom}\label{gods-love-for-israel-in-contrast-to-his-treatment-of-the-sister-nation-of-edom}}

\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} A revelation, the \textsc{Lord}'s\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  When rendered in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS, ``\textsc{Lord}'' or ``GOD'' is
  the translation of God's Proper Name.} word to Israel by Malachi.
\bibleverse{2} ``I have loved you,'' says the \textsc{Lord}. Yet you
say, ``How have you loved us?'' ``Wasn't Esau Jacob's brother?'' says
the \textsc{Lord}, ``Yet I loved Jacob; \bibleverse{3} but Esau I hated,
and made his mountains a desolation, and gave his heritage to the
jackals of the wilderness.'' \bibleverse{4} Whereas Edom says, ``We are
beaten down, but we will return and build the waste places,'' the
\textsc{Lord} of Armies says, ``They shall build, but I will throw down;
and men will call them `The Wicked Land,' even the people against whom
the \textsc{Lord} shows wrath forever.'' \bibleverse{5} Your eyes will
see, and you will say, ``The \textsc{Lord} is great---even beyond the
border of Israel!''

\hypertarget{demonstration-of-lack-of-love-and-neglect-of-priesthood-duty-to-god}{%
\subsection{Demonstration of lack of love and neglect of priesthood duty
to
God}\label{demonstration-of-lack-of-love-and-neglect-of-priesthood-duty-to-god}}

\bibleverse{6} ``A son honours his father, and a servant his master. If
I am a father, then where is my honour? And if I am a master, where is
the respect due me?'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies to you priests
who despise my name. ``You say, `How have we despised your name?'
\bibleverse{7} You offer polluted bread on my altar. You say, `How have
we polluted you?' In that you say, `The \textsc{Lord}'s table is
contemptible.' \bibleverse{8} When you offer the blind for sacrifice,
isn't that evil? And when you offer the lame and sick, isn't that evil?
Present it now to your governor! Will he be pleased with you? Or will he
accept your person?'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{9}
``Now, please entreat the favour of God,\footnote{\textbf{1:9} The
  Hebrew word rendered ``God'' is ``\hebrew{אֱלֹהִ֑ים}'' (Elohim).} that he
may be gracious to us. With this, will he accept any of you?'' says the
\textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{10} ``Oh that there were one
amongst you who would shut the doors, that you might not kindle fire on
my altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of
Armies, ``neither will I accept an offering at your hand.
\bibleverse{11} For from the rising of the sun even to its going down,
my name is great amongst the nations, and in every place incense will be
offered to my name, and a pure offering; for my name is great amongst
the nations,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{12} ``But
you profane it when you say, `The \textsc{Lord}'s table is polluted, and
its fruit, even its food, is contemptible.' \bibleverse{13} You say
also, `Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:13} ``Behold'', from ``\hebrew{הִנֵּה}'',
  means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used
  as an interjection.} what a weariness it is!' And you have sniffed at
it'', says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies; ``and you have brought that
which was taken by violence, the lame, and the sick; thus you bring the
offering. Should I accept this at your hand?'' says the \textsc{Lord}.
\bibleverse{14} ``But the deceiver is cursed who has in his flock a
male, and vows and sacrifices to the Lord\footnote{\textbf{1:14} The
  word translated ``Lord'' is ``Adonai.''} a defective thing; for I am a
great King,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies, ``and my name is awesome
amongst the nations.''

\hypertarget{warning-and-threat-of-punishment-to-priests-levi-then-and-now}{%
\subsection{Warning and threat of punishment to priests; Levi then and
now}\label{warning-and-threat-of-punishment-to-priests-levi-then-and-now}}

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Now, you priests, this commandment is for you.
\bibleverse{2} If you will not listen, and if you will not take it to
heart, to give glory to my name,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies,
``then I will send the curse on you, and I will curse your blessings.
Indeed, I have cursed them already, because you do not take it to heart.
\bibleverse{3} Behold, I will rebuke your offspring,\footnote{\textbf{2:3}
  or, seed} and will spread dung on your faces, even the dung of your
feasts; and you will be taken away with it. \bibleverse{4} You will know
that I have sent this commandment to you, that my covenant may be with
Levi,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{5} ``My covenant
was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him that he might be
reverent towards me; and he was reverent towards me, and stood in awe of
my name. \bibleverse{6} The law of truth was in his mouth, and
unrighteousness was not found in his lips. He walked with me in peace
and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity. \bibleverse{7} For
the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at
his mouth; for he is the messenger of the \textsc{Lord} of Armies.
\bibleverse{8} But you have turned away from the path. You have caused
many to stumble in the law. You have corrupted the covenant of Levi,''
says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{9} ``Therefore I have also
made you contemptible and wicked before all the people, according to the
way you have not kept my ways, but have had respect for persons in the
law.

\hypertarget{against-marriages-with-foreign-women-and-against-divorces-marriage-fidelity-reminder}{%
\subsection{Against marriages with foreign women and against divorces;
Marriage fidelity
reminder}\label{against-marriages-with-foreign-women-and-against-divorces-marriage-fidelity-reminder}}

\bibleverse{10} Don't we all have one father? Hasn't one God created us?
Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, profaning
the covenant of our fathers? \bibleverse{11} Judah has dealt
treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in
Jerusalem; for Judah has profaned the holiness of the \textsc{Lord}
which he loves, and has married the daughter of a foreign god.
\bibleverse{12} The \textsc{Lord} will cut off the man who does this,
him who wakes and him who answers, out of the tents of Jacob and him who
offers an offering to the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{13}
``This again you do: you cover the \textsc{Lord}'s altar with tears,
with weeping, and with sighing, because he doesn't regard the offering
any more, neither receives it with good will at your hand.
\bibleverse{14} Yet you say, `Why?' Because the \textsc{Lord} has been
witness between you and the wife of your youth, against whom you have
dealt treacherously, though she is your companion and the wife of your
covenant. \bibleverse{15} Did he not make you one, although he had the
residue of the Spirit? Why one? He sought godly offspring. Therefore
take heed to your spirit, and let no one deal treacherously against the
wife of his youth. \bibleverse{16} One who hates and divorces'', says
the \textsc{Lord}, the God of Israel, ``covers his garment with
violence!'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. ``Therefore pay attention
to your spirit, that you don't be unfaithful.

\hypertarget{rebuke-those-who-doubt-the-justice-of-god-description-of-the-course-of-infallible-judgment}{%
\subsection{Rebuke those who doubt the justice of God; Description of
the Course of Infallible
Judgment}\label{rebuke-those-who-doubt-the-justice-of-god-description-of-the-course-of-infallible-judgment}}

\bibleverse{17} You have wearied the \textsc{Lord} with your words. Yet
you say, `How have we wearied him?' In that you say, `Everyone who does
evil is good in the \textsc{Lord}'s sight, and he delights in them;' or
`Where is the God of justice?'

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} ``Behold, I send my messenger, and he will prepare the
way before me! The Lord, whom you seek, will suddenly come to his
temple. Behold, the messenger of the covenant, whom you desire, is
coming!'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{2} ``But who can
endure the day of his coming? And who will stand when he appears? For he
is like a refiner's fire, and like launderers' soap; \bibleverse{3} and
he will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he will purify the
sons of Levi, and refine them as gold and silver; and they shall offer
to the \textsc{Lord} offerings in righteousness. \bibleverse{4} Then the
offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasant to the \textsc{Lord} as
in the days of old and as in ancient years. \bibleverse{5} I will come
near to you to judgement. I will be a swift witness against the
sorcerers, against the adulterers, against the perjurers, and against
those who oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the
fatherless, and who deprive the foreigner of justice, and don't fear
me,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies.

\hypertarget{peoples-current-bad-situation-is-self-inflicted-through-multiple-crimes}{%
\subsection{People's current bad situation is self-inflicted through
multiple
crimes}\label{peoples-current-bad-situation-is-self-inflicted-through-multiple-crimes}}

\bibleverse{6} ``For I, the \textsc{Lord}, don't change; therefore you,
sons of Jacob, are not consumed. \bibleverse{7} From the days of your
fathers you have turned away from my ordinances and have not kept them.
Return to me, and I will return to you,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of
Armies. ``But you say, `How shall we return?' \bibleverse{8} Will a man
rob God? Yet you rob me! But you say, `How have we robbed you?' In
tithes and offerings. \bibleverse{9} You are cursed with the curse; for
you rob me, even this whole nation. \bibleverse{10} Bring the whole
tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house, and test
me now in this,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies, ``if I will not open
you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there will
not be enough room for. \bibleverse{11} I will rebuke the devourer for
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither
shall your vine cast its fruit before its time in the field,'' says the
\textsc{Lord} of Armies. \bibleverse{12} ``All nations shall call you
blessed, for you will be a delightful land,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of
Armies.

\hypertarget{reproof-and-correction-of-the-pious-discontented-and-doubtful-consoling-promise-to-the-righteous}{%
\subsection{Reproof and correction of the pious discontented and
doubtful; consoling promise to the
righteous}\label{reproof-and-correction-of-the-pious-discontented-and-doubtful-consoling-promise-to-the-righteous}}

\bibleverse{13} ``Your words have been harsh against me,'' says the
\textsc{Lord}. ``Yet you say, `What have we spoken against you?'
\bibleverse{14} You have said, `It is vain to serve God,' and `What
profit is it that we have followed his instructions and that we have
walked mournfully before the \textsc{Lord} of Armies? \bibleverse{15}
Now we call the proud happy; yes, those who work wickedness are built
up; yes, they tempt God, and escape.' \bibleverse{16} Then those who
feared the \textsc{Lord} spoke one with another; and the \textsc{Lord}
listened and heard, and a book of memory was written before him for
those who feared the \textsc{Lord} and who honoured his name.
\bibleverse{17} They shall be mine,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies,
``my own possession in the day that I make. I will spare them, as a man
spares his own son who serves him. \bibleverse{18} Then you shall return
and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him who serves
God and him who doesn't serve him.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} ``For behold, the day comes, burning like a furnace, when
all the proud and all who work wickedness will be stubble. The day that
comes will burn them up,'' says the \textsc{Lord} of Armies, ``so that
it will leave them neither root nor branch. \bibleverse{2} But to you
who fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in
its wings. You will go out and leap like calves of the stall.
\bibleverse{3} You shall tread down the wicked; for they will be ashes
under the soles of your feet in the day that I make,'' says the
\textsc{Lord} of Armies.

\hypertarget{final-warning-and-promise-of-the-mission-of-the-prophet-elijah}{%
\subsection{Final warning and promise of the mission of the prophet
Elijah}\label{final-warning-and-promise-of-the-mission-of-the-prophet-elijah}}

\bibleverse{4} ``Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded
to him in Horeb for all Israel, even statutes and ordinances.
\bibleverse{5} Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the
great and terrible day of the \textsc{Lord} comes. \bibleverse{6} He
will turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of
the children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the earth with a
curse.''
