\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Since many have undertaken to set in order a narrative
concerning those matters which have been fulfilled amongst us,
\bibleverse{2} even as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses
and servants of the word delivered them to us, \bibleverse{3} it seemed
good to me also, having traced the course of all things accurately from
the first, to write to you in order, most excellent Theophilus;
\bibleverse{4} that you might know the certainty concerning the things
in which you were instructed.

\bibleverse{5} There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a
certain priest named Zacharias, of the priestly division of Abijah. He
had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
\bibleverse{6} They were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. \bibleverse{7} But
they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well
advanced in years.

\bibleverse{8} Now while he executed the priest's office before God in
the order of his division \bibleverse{9} according to the custom of the
priest's office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and
burn incense. \bibleverse{10} The whole multitude of the people were
praying outside at the hour of incense.

\bibleverse{11} An angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the
right side of the altar of incense. \bibleverse{12} Zacharias was
troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him. \bibleverse{13} But
the angel said to him, ``Don't be afraid, Zacharias, because your
request has been heard. Your wife, Elizabeth, will bear you a son, and
you shall call his name John. \bibleverse{14} You will have joy and
gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth. \bibleverse{15} For he
will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he will drink no wine nor
strong drink. He will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his
mother's womb. \bibleverse{16} He will turn many of the children of
Israel to the Lord their God. \bibleverse{17} He will go before him in
the spirit and power of Elijah, `to turn the hearts of the fathers to
the children,'\footnote{\textbf{1:17} Malachi 4:6} and the disobedient
to the wisdom of the just; to prepare a people prepared for the Lord.''

\bibleverse{18} Zacharias said to the angel, ``How can I be sure of
this? For I am an old man, and my wife is well advanced in years.''

\bibleverse{19} The angel answered him, ``I am Gabriel, who stands in
the presence of God. I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this
good news. \bibleverse{20} Behold,\footnote{\textbf{1:20} ``Behold'',
  from ``ἰδοὺ'', means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at.
  It is often used as an interjection.} you will be silent and not able
to speak until the day that these things will happen, because you didn't
believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time.''

\bibleverse{21} The people were waiting for Zacharias, and they
marvelled that he delayed in the temple. \bibleverse{22} When he came
out, he could not speak to them. They perceived that he had seen a
vision in the temple. He continued making signs to them, and remained
mute. \bibleverse{23} When the days of his service were fulfilled, he
departed to his house. \bibleverse{24} After these days Elizabeth his
wife conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying, \bibleverse{25}
``Thus has the Lord done to me in the days in which he looked at me, to
take away my reproach amongst men.''

\bibleverse{26} Now in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from
God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth, \bibleverse{27} to a virgin
pledged to be married to a man whose name was Joseph, of David's house.
The virgin's name was Mary. \bibleverse{28} Having come in, the angel
said to her, ``Rejoice, you highly favoured one! The Lord is with you.
Blessed are you amongst women!''

\bibleverse{29} But when she saw him, she was greatly troubled at the
saying, and considered what kind of salutation this might be.
\bibleverse{30} The angel said to her, ``Don't be afraid, Mary, for you
have found favour with God. \bibleverse{31} Behold, you will conceive in
your womb and give birth to a son, and shall name him `Jesus.'
\bibleverse{32} He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most
High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David,
\bibleverse{33} and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever. There
will be no end to his Kingdom.''

\bibleverse{34} Mary said to the angel, ``How can this be, seeing I am a
virgin?''

\bibleverse{35} The angel answered her, ``The Holy Spirit will come on
you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore also
the holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God.
\bibleverse{36} Behold, Elizabeth your relative also has conceived a son
in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her who was called
barren. \bibleverse{37} For nothing spoken by God is
impossible.''\footnote{\textbf{1:37} or, ``For everything spoken by God
  is possible.''}

\bibleverse{38} Mary said, ``Behold, the servant of the Lord; let it be
done to me according to your word.''

Then the angel departed from her.

\bibleverse{39} Mary arose in those days and went into the hill country
with haste, into a city of Judah, \bibleverse{40} and entered into the
house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth. \bibleverse{41} When Elizabeth
heard Mary's greeting, the baby leapt in her womb; and Elizabeth was
filled with the Holy Spirit. \bibleverse{42} She called out with a loud
voice and said, ``Blessed are you amongst women, and blessed is the
fruit of your womb! \bibleverse{43} Why am I so favoured, that the
mother of my Lord should come to me? \bibleverse{44} For behold, when
the voice of your greeting came into my ears, the baby leapt in my womb
for joy! \bibleverse{45} Blessed is she who believed, for there will be
a fulfilment of the things which have been spoken to her from the
Lord!''

\bibleverse{46} Mary said, ``My soul magnifies the Lord. \bibleverse{47}
My spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour, \bibleverse{48} for he has
looked at the humble state of his servant. For behold, from now on, all
generations will call me blessed. \bibleverse{49} For he who is mighty
has done great things for me. Holy is his name. \bibleverse{50} His
mercy is for generations and generations on those who fear him.
\bibleverse{51} He has shown strength with his arm. He has scattered the
proud in the imagination of their hearts. \bibleverse{52} He has put
down princes from their thrones, and has exalted the lowly.
\bibleverse{53} He has filled the hungry with good things. He has sent
the rich away empty. \bibleverse{54} He has given help to Israel, his
servant, that he might remember mercy, \bibleverse{55} as he spoke to
our fathers, to Abraham and his offspring\footnote{\textbf{1:55} or,
  seed} forever.''

\bibleverse{56} Mary stayed with her about three months, and then
returned to her house.

\bibleverse{57} Now the time that Elizabeth should give birth was
fulfilled, and she gave birth to a son. \bibleverse{58} Her neighbours
and her relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards
her, and they rejoiced with her. \bibleverse{59} On the eighth day, they
came to circumcise the child; and they would have called him Zacharias,
after the name of his father. \bibleverse{60} His mother answered, ``Not
so; but he will be called John.''

\bibleverse{61} They said to her, ``There is no one amongst your
relatives who is called by this name.'' \bibleverse{62} They made signs
to his father, what he would have him called.

\bibleverse{63} He asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, ``His name is
John.''

They all marvelled. \bibleverse{64} His mouth was opened immediately and
his tongue freed, and he spoke, blessing God. \bibleverse{65} Fear came
on all who lived around them, and all these sayings were talked about
throughout all the hill country of Judea. \bibleverse{66} All who heard
them laid them up in their heart, saying, ``What then will this child
be?'' The hand of the Lord was with him.

\bibleverse{67} His father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Spirit,
and prophesied, saying, \bibleverse{68} ``Blessed be the Lord, the God
of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people; \bibleverse{69}
and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David \bibleverse{70} (as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who
have been from of old), \bibleverse{71} salvation from our enemies and
from the hand of all who hate us; \bibleverse{72} to show mercy towards
our fathers, to remember his holy covenant, \bibleverse{73} the oath
which he swore to Abraham our father, \bibleverse{74} to grant to us
that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, should serve
him without fear, \bibleverse{75} in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of our life. \bibleverse{76} And you, child, will be
called a prophet of the Most High; for you will go before the face of
the Lord to prepare his ways, \bibleverse{77} to give knowledge of
salvation to his people by the remission of their sins, \bibleverse{78}
because of the tender mercy of our God, by which the dawn from on high
will visit us, \bibleverse{79} to shine on those who sit in darkness and
the shadow of death; to guide our feet into the way of peace.''

\bibleverse{80} The child was growing and becoming strong in spirit, and
was in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} Now in those days, a decree went out from Caesar Augustus
that all the world should be enrolled. \bibleverse{2} This was the first
enrolment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria. \bibleverse{3} All
went to enrol themselves, everyone to his own city. \bibleverse{4}
Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into
Judea, to David's city, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the
house and family of David, \bibleverse{5} to enrol himself with Mary,
who was pledged to be married to him as wife, being pregnant.

\bibleverse{6} While they were there, the day had come for her to give
birth. \bibleverse{7} She gave birth to her firstborn son. She wrapped
him in bands of cloth and laid him in a feeding trough, because there
was no room for them in the inn.

\bibleverse{8} There were shepherds in the same country staying in the
field, and keeping watch by night over their flock. \bibleverse{9}
Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord
shone around them, and they were terrified. \bibleverse{10} The angel
said to them, ``Don't be afraid, for behold, I bring you good news of
great joy which will be to all the people. \bibleverse{11} For there is
born to you today, in David's city, a Saviour, who is Christ\footnote{\textbf{2:11}
  ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} the Lord. \bibleverse{12} This is
the sign to you: you will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth, lying
in a feeding trough.'' \bibleverse{13} Suddenly, there was with the
angel a multitude of the heavenly army praising God and saying,
\bibleverse{14} ``Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will
towards men.''

\bibleverse{15} When the angels went away from them into the sky, the
shepherds said to one another, ``Let's go to Bethlehem, now, and see
this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.''
\bibleverse{16} They came with haste and found both Mary and Joseph, and
the baby was lying in the feeding trough. \bibleverse{17} When they saw
it, they publicised widely the saying which was spoken to them about
this child. \bibleverse{18} All who heard it wondered at the things
which were spoken to them by the shepherds. \bibleverse{19} But Mary
kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart. \bibleverse{20} The
shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that
they had heard and seen, just as it was told them.

\bibleverse{21} When eight days were fulfilled for the circumcision of
the child, his name was called Jesus, which was given by the angel
before he was conceived in the womb.

\bibleverse{22} When the days of their purification according to the law
of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him
to the Lord \bibleverse{23} (as it is written in the law of the Lord,
``Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the
Lord''),\footnote{\textbf{2:23} Exodus 13:2,12} \bibleverse{24} and to
offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the
Lord, ``A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.''\footnote{\textbf{2:24}
  Leviticus 12:8}

\bibleverse{25} Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was
Simeon. This man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation
of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him. \bibleverse{26} It had been
revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before
he had seen the Lord's Christ.\footnote{\textbf{2:26} ``Christ'' (Greek)
  and ``Messiah'' (Hebrew) both mean ``Anointed One''} \bibleverse{27}
He came in the Spirit into the temple. When the parents brought in the
child, Jesus, that they might do concerning him according to the custom
of the law, \bibleverse{28} then he received him into his arms and
blessed God, and said, \bibleverse{29} ``Now you are releasing your
servant, Master, according to your word, in peace; \bibleverse{30} for
my eyes have seen your salvation, \bibleverse{31} which you have
prepared before the face of all peoples; \bibleverse{32} a light for
revelation to the nations, and the glory of your people Israel.''

\bibleverse{33} Joseph and his mother were marvelling at the things
which were spoken concerning him. \bibleverse{34} Simeon blessed them,
and said to Mary, his mother, ``Behold, this child is appointed for the
falling and the rising of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken
against. \bibleverse{35} Yes, a sword will pierce through your own soul,
that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.''

\bibleverse{36} There was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of
Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived
with a husband seven years from her virginity, \bibleverse{37} and she
had been a widow for about eighty-four years), who didn't depart from
the temple, worshipping with fastings and petitions night and day.
\bibleverse{38} Coming up at that very hour, she gave thanks to the
Lord, and spoke of him to all those who were looking for redemption in
Jerusalem.

\bibleverse{39} When they had accomplished all things that were
according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their
own city, Nazareth. \bibleverse{40} The child was growing, and was
becoming strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the grace of
God was upon him.

\bibleverse{41} His parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of
the Passover. \bibleverse{42} When he was twelve years old, they went up
to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast; \bibleverse{43} and
when they had fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus
stayed behind in Jerusalem. Joseph and his mother didn't know it,
\bibleverse{44} but supposing him to be in the company, they went a
day's journey; and they looked for him amongst their relatives and
acquaintances. \bibleverse{45} When they didn't find him, they returned
to Jerusalem, looking for him. \bibleverse{46} After three days they
found him in the temple, sitting in the middle of the teachers, both
listening to them and asking them questions. \bibleverse{47} All who
heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers.
\bibleverse{48} When they saw him, they were astonished; and his mother
said to him, ``Son, why have you treated us this way? Behold, your
father and I were anxiously looking for you.''

\bibleverse{49} He said to them, ``Why were you looking for me? Didn't
you know that I must be in my Father's house?'' \bibleverse{50} They
didn't understand the saying which he spoke to them. \bibleverse{51} And
he went down with them and came to Nazareth. He was subject to them, and
his mother kept all these sayings in her heart. \bibleverse{52} And
Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius
Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch
of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and
Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, \bibleverse{2} during the
high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the
son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. \bibleverse{3} He came into all the
region around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for
remission of sins. \bibleverse{4} As it is written in the book of the
words of Isaiah the prophet, ``The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, `Make ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
\bibleverse{5} Every valley will be filled. Every mountain and hill will
be brought low. The crooked will become straight, and the rough ways
smooth. \bibleverse{6} All flesh will see God's
salvation.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{3:6} Isaiah 40:3-5}

\bibleverse{7} He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be
baptised by him, ``You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from
the wrath to come? \bibleverse{8} Therefore produce fruits worthy of
repentance, and don't begin to say amongst yourselves, `We have Abraham
for our father;' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to
Abraham from these stones! \bibleverse{9} Even now the axe also lies at
the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that doesn't produce good
fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.''

\bibleverse{10} The multitudes asked him, ``What then must we do?''

\bibleverse{11} He answered them, ``He who has two coats, let him give
to him who has none. He who has food, let him do likewise.''

\bibleverse{12} Tax collectors also came to be baptised, and they said
to him, ``Teacher, what must we do?''

\bibleverse{13} He said to them, ``Collect no more than that which is
appointed to you.''

\bibleverse{14} Soldiers also asked him, saying, ``What about us? What
must we do?''

He said to them, ``Extort from no one by violence, neither accuse anyone
wrongfully. Be content with your wages.''

\bibleverse{15} As the people were in expectation, and all men reasoned
in their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he was the Christ,
\bibleverse{16} John answered them all, ``I indeed baptise you with
water, but he comes who is mightier than I, the strap of whose sandals I
am not worthy to loosen. He will baptise you in the Holy Spirit and
fire. \bibleverse{17} His winnowing fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor, and will gather the wheat into
his barn; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.''

\bibleverse{18} Then with many other exhortations he preached good news
to the people, \bibleverse{19} but Herod the tetrarch,\footnote{\textbf{3:19}
  a tetrarch is one of four governors of a province} being reproved by
him for Herodias, his brother's\footnote{\textbf{3:19} TR reads
  ``brother Philip's'' instead of ``brother's''} wife, and for all the
evil things which Herod had done, \bibleverse{20} added this also to
them all, that he shut up John in prison.

\bibleverse{21} Now when all the people were baptised, Jesus also had
been baptised and was praying. The sky was opened, \bibleverse{22} and
the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form like a dove on him; and a
voice came out of the sky, saying ``You are my beloved Son. In you I am
well pleased.''

\bibleverse{23} Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty
years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
\bibleverse{24} the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi,
the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph, \bibleverse{25} the son of
Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son
of Naggai, \bibleverse{26} the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the
son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah, \bibleverse{27} the
son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, the son of Neri, \bibleverse{28} the son of Melchi, the son
of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er,
\bibleverse{29} the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim,
the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, \bibleverse{30} the son of Simeon,
the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of
Eliakim, \bibleverse{31} the son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son of
Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David, \bibleverse{32} the son
of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son
of Nahshon, \bibleverse{33} the son of Amminadab, the son of
Aram,\footnote{\textbf{3:33} NU reads ``Admin, the son of Arni'' instead
  of ``Aram''} the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
\bibleverse{34} the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham,
the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, \bibleverse{35} the son of Serug,
the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
\bibleverse{36} the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem,
the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, \bibleverse{37} the son of
Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel,
the son of Cainan, \bibleverse{38} the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the
son of Adam, the son of God.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan
and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness \bibleverse{2} for forty
days, being tempted by the devil. He ate nothing in those days.
Afterward, when they were completed, he was hungry.

\bibleverse{3} The devil said to him, ``If you are the Son of God,
command this stone to become bread.''

\bibleverse{4} Jesus answered him, saying, ``It is written, `Man shall
not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{4:4}
  Deuteronomy 8:3}

\bibleverse{5} The devil, leading him up on a high mountain, showed him
all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. \bibleverse{6} The
devil said to him, ``I will give you all this authority and their glory,
for it has been delivered to me, and I give it to whomever I want.
\bibleverse{7} If you therefore will worship before me, it will all be
yours.''

\bibleverse{8} Jesus answered him, ``Get behind me, Satan! For it is
written, `You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him
only.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{4:8} Deuteronomy 6:13}

\bibleverse{9} He led him to Jerusalem and set him on the pinnacle of
the temple, and said to him, ``If you are the Son of God, cast yourself
down from here, \bibleverse{10} for it is written, `He will put his
angels in charge of you, to guard you;'

\bibleverse{11} and, `On their hands they will bear you up, lest perhaps
you dash your foot against a stone.'''\footnote{\textbf{4:11} Psalm
  91:11-12}

\bibleverse{12} Jesus answering, said to him, ``It has been said, `You
shall not tempt the Lord your God.'\,''\footnote{\textbf{4:12}
  Deuteronomy 6:16}

\bibleverse{13} When the devil had completed every temptation, he
departed from him until another time.

\bibleverse{14} Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee,
and news about him spread through all the surrounding area.
\bibleverse{15} He taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.

\bibleverse{16} He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up. He
entered, as was his custom, into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and
stood up to read. \bibleverse{17} The book of the prophet Isaiah was
handed to him. He opened the book, and found the place where it was
written, \bibleverse{18} ``The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he
has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal
the broken hearted,\footnote{\textbf{4:18} NU omits ``to heal the broken
  hearted''} to proclaim release to the captives, recovering of sight to
the blind, to deliver those who are crushed, \bibleverse{19} and to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.''\footnote{\textbf{4:19}
  Isaiah 61:1-2}

\bibleverse{20} He closed the book, gave it back to the attendant, and
sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him.
\bibleverse{21} He began to tell them, ``Today, this Scripture has been
fulfilled in your hearing.''

\bibleverse{22} All testified about him and wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth; and they said, ``Isn't this
Joseph's son?''

\bibleverse{23} He said to them, ``Doubtless you will tell me this
proverb, `Physician, heal yourself! Whatever we have heard done at
Capernaum, do also here in your hometown.'\,'' \bibleverse{24} He said,
``Most certainly I tell you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.
\bibleverse{25} But truly I tell you, there were many widows in Israel
in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut up three years and six
months, when a great famine came over all the land. \bibleverse{26}
Elijah was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath, in the land of
Sidon, to a woman who was a widow. \bibleverse{27} There were many
lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them
was cleansed, except Naaman, the Syrian.''

\bibleverse{28} They were all filled with wrath in the synagogue as they
heard these things. \bibleverse{29} They rose up, threw him out of the
city, and led him to the brow of the hill that their city was built on,
that they might throw him off the cliff. \bibleverse{30} But he, passing
through the middle of them, went his way.

\bibleverse{31} He came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. He was
teaching them on the Sabbath day, \bibleverse{32} and they were
astonished at his teaching, for his word was with authority.
\bibleverse{33} In the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an
unclean demon; and he cried out with a loud voice, \bibleverse{34}
saying, ``Ah! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you
come to destroy us? I know who you are: the Holy One of God!''

\bibleverse{35} Jesus rebuked him, saying, ``Be silent and come out of
him!'' When the demon had thrown him down in the middle of them, he came
out of him, having done him no harm.

\bibleverse{36} Amazement came on all and they spoke together, one with
another, saying, ``What is this word? For with authority and power he
commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!'' \bibleverse{37} News
about him went out into every place of the surrounding region.

\bibleverse{38} He rose up from the synagogue and entered into Simon's
house. Simon's mother-in-law was afflicted with a great fever, and they
begged him to help her. \bibleverse{39} He stood over her and rebuked
the fever, and it left her. Immediately she rose up and served them.
\bibleverse{40} When the sun was setting, all those who had any sick
with various diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on
every one of them, and healed them. \bibleverse{41} Demons also came out
of many, crying out and saying, ``You are the Christ, the Son of God!''
Rebuking them, he didn't allow them to speak, because they knew that he
was the Christ.

\bibleverse{42} When it was day, he departed and went into an
uninhabited place and the multitudes looked for him, and came to him,
and held on to him, so that he wouldn't go away from them.
\bibleverse{43} But he said to them, ``I must preach the good news of
God's Kingdom to the other cities also. For this reason I have been
sent.'' \bibleverse{44} He was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Now while the multitude pressed on him and heard the word
of God, he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret. \bibleverse{2} He saw
two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them
and were washing their nets. \bibleverse{3} He entered into one of the
boats, which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the
land. He sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat.

\bibleverse{4} When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, ``Put
out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch.''

\bibleverse{5} Simon answered him, ``Master, we worked all night and
caught nothing; but at your word I will let down the net.''
\bibleverse{6} When they had done this, they caught a great multitude of
fish, and their net was breaking. \bibleverse{7} They beckoned to their
partners in the other boat, that they should come and help them. They
came and filled both boats, so that they began to sink. \bibleverse{8}
But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying,
``Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord.'' \bibleverse{9} For he
was amazed, and all who were with him, at the catch of fish which they
had caught; \bibleverse{10} and so also were James and John, sons of
Zebedee, who were partners with Simon.

Jesus said to Simon, ``Don't be afraid. From now on you will be catching
people alive.''

\bibleverse{11} When they had brought their boats to land, they left
everything, and followed him.

\bibleverse{12} While he was in one of the cities, behold, there was a
man full of leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell on his face and begged
him, saying, ``Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean.''

\bibleverse{13} He stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, ``I
want to. Be made clean.''

Immediately the leprosy left him. \bibleverse{14} He commanded him to
tell no one, ``But go your way and show yourself to the priest, and
offer for your cleansing according to what Moses commanded, for a
testimony to them.''

\bibleverse{15} But the report concerning him spread much more, and
great multitudes came together to hear and to be healed by him of their
infirmities. \bibleverse{16} But he withdrew himself into the desert and
prayed.

\bibleverse{17} On one of those days, he was teaching; and there were
Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by who had come out of every
village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was with
him to heal them. \bibleverse{18} Behold, men brought a paralysed man on
a cot, and they sought to bring him in to lay before Jesus.
\bibleverse{19} Not finding a way to bring him in because of the
multitude, they went up to the housetop and let him down through the
tiles with his cot into the middle before Jesus. \bibleverse{20} Seeing
their faith, he said to him, ``Man, your sins are forgiven you.''

\bibleverse{21} The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying,
``Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God
alone?''

\bibleverse{22} But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered them,
``Why are you reasoning so in your hearts? \bibleverse{23} Which is
easier to say, `Your sins are forgiven you,' or to say, `Arise and
walk?' \bibleverse{24} But that you may know that the Son of Man has
authority on earth to forgive sins,'' he said to the paralysed man, ``I
tell you, arise, take up your cot, and go to your house.''

\bibleverse{25} Immediately he rose up before them, and took up that
which he was laying on, and departed to his house, glorifying God.
\bibleverse{26} Amazement took hold on all, and they glorified God. They
were filled with fear, saying, ``We have seen strange things today.''

\bibleverse{27} After these things he went out and saw a tax collector
named Levi sitting at the tax office, and said to him, ``Follow me!''

\bibleverse{28} He left everything, and rose up and followed him.
\bibleverse{29} Levi made a great feast for him in his house. There was
a great crowd of tax collectors and others who were reclining with them.
\bibleverse{30} Their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his
disciples, saying, ``Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors
and sinners?''

\bibleverse{31} Jesus answered them, ``Those who are healthy have no
need for a physician, but those who are sick do. \bibleverse{32} I have
not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.''

\bibleverse{33} They said to him, ``Why do John's disciples often fast
and pray, likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat
and drink?''

\bibleverse{34} He said to them, ``Can you make the friends of the
bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them? \bibleverse{35} But
the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them.
Then they will fast in those days.''

\bibleverse{36} He also told a parable to them. ``No one puts a piece
from a new garment on an old garment, or else he will tear the new, and
also the piece from the new will not match the old. \bibleverse{37} No
one puts new wine into old wine skins, or else the new wine will burst
the skins, and it will be spilled and the skins will be destroyed.
\bibleverse{38} But new wine must be put into fresh wine skins, and both
are preserved. \bibleverse{39} No man having drunk old wine immediately
desires new, for he says, `The old is better.'\,''

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibleverse{1} Now on the second Sabbath after the first, he was going
through the grain fields. His disciples plucked the heads of grain and
ate, rubbing them in their hands. \bibleverse{2} But some of the
Pharisees said to them, ``Why do you do that which is not lawful to do
on the Sabbath day?''

\bibleverse{3} Jesus, answering them, said, ``Haven't you read what
David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him,
\bibleverse{4} how he entered into God's house, and took and ate the
show bread, and gave also to those who were with him, which is not
lawful to eat except for the priests alone?'' \bibleverse{5} He said to
them, ``The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.''

\bibleverse{6} It also happened on another Sabbath that he entered into
the synagogue and taught. There was a man there, and his right hand was
withered. \bibleverse{7} The scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to
see whether he would heal on the Sabbath, that they might find an
accusation against him. \bibleverse{8} But he knew their thoughts; and
he said to the man who had the withered hand, ``Rise up and stand in the
middle.'' He arose and stood. \bibleverse{9} Then Jesus said to them,
``I will ask you something: Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good, or
to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?'' \bibleverse{10} He looked
around at them all, and said to the man, ``Stretch out your hand.'' He
did, and his hand was restored as sound as the other. \bibleverse{11}
But they were filled with rage, and talked with one another about what
they might do to Jesus.

\bibleverse{12} In these days, he went out to the mountain to pray, and
he continued all night in prayer to God. \bibleverse{13} When it was
day, he called his disciples, and from them he chose twelve, whom he
also named apostles: \bibleverse{14} Simon, whom he also named Peter;
Andrew, his brother; James; John; Philip; Bartholomew; \bibleverse{15}
Matthew; Thomas; James the son of Alphaeus; Simon who was called the
Zealot; \bibleverse{16} Judas the son of James; and Judas Iscariot, who
also became a traitor.

\bibleverse{17} He came down with them and stood on a level place, with
a crowd of his disciples and a great number of the people from all Judea
and Jerusalem and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him
and to be healed of their diseases, \bibleverse{18} as well as those who
were troubled by unclean spirits; and they were being healed.
\bibleverse{19} All the multitude sought to touch him, for power came
out of him and healed them all.

\bibleverse{20} He lifted up his eyes to his disciples, and said:
``Blessed are you who are poor, for God's Kingdom is yours.
\bibleverse{21} Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be filled.
Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh. \bibleverse{22}
Blessed are you when men hate you, and when they exclude and mock you,
and throw out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake.
\bibleverse{23} Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for behold, your
reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same thing to the
prophets. \bibleverse{24} ``But woe to you who are rich! For you have
received your consolation. \bibleverse{25} Woe to you, you who are full
now, for you will be hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will
mourn and weep. \bibleverse{26} Woe,\footnote{\textbf{6:26} TR adds ``to
  you''} when\footnote{\textbf{6:26} TR adds ``all''} men speak well of
you, for their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets.

\bibleverse{27} ``But I tell you who hear: love your enemies, do good to
those who hate you, \bibleverse{28} bless those who curse you, and pray
for those who mistreat you. \bibleverse{29} To him who strikes you on
the cheek, offer also the other; and from him who takes away your cloak,
don't withhold your coat also. \bibleverse{30} Give to everyone who asks
you, and don't ask him who takes away your goods to give them back
again.

\bibleverse{31} ``As you would like people to do to you, do exactly so
to them.

\bibleverse{32} ``If you love those who love you, what credit is that to
you? For even sinners love those who love them. \bibleverse{33} If you
do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For
even sinners do the same. \bibleverse{34} If you lend to those from whom
you hope to receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to
sinners, to receive back as much. \bibleverse{35} But love your enemies,
and do good, and lend, expecting nothing back; and your reward will be
great, and you will be children of the Most High; for he is kind towards
the unthankful and evil. \bibleverse{36} ``Therefore be merciful, even
as your Father is also merciful. \bibleverse{37} Don't judge, and you
won't be judged. Don't condemn, and you won't be condemned. Set free,
and you will be set free.

\bibleverse{38} ``Give, and it will be given to you: good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, and running over, will be given to
you.\footnote{\textbf{6:38} literally, into your bosom.} For with the
same measure you measure it will be measured back to you.''

\bibleverse{39} He spoke a parable to them. ``Can the blind guide the
blind? Won't they both fall into a pit? \bibleverse{40} A disciple is
not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be
like his teacher. \bibleverse{41} Why do you see the speck of chaff that
is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your
own eye? \bibleverse{42} Or how can you tell your brother, `Brother, let
me remove the speck of chaff that is in your eye,' when you yourself
don't see the beam that is in your own eye? You hypocrite! First remove
the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the
speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye.

\bibleverse{43} ``For there is no good tree that produces rotten fruit,
nor again a rotten tree that produces good fruit. \bibleverse{44} For
each tree is known by its own fruit. For people don't gather figs from
thorns, nor do they gather grapes from a bramble bush. \bibleverse{45}
The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings out that which
is good, and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings
out that which is evil, for out of the abundance of the heart, his mouth
speaks.

\bibleverse{46} ``Why do you call me, `Lord, Lord,' and don't do the
things which I say? \bibleverse{47} Everyone who comes to me, and hears
my words and does them, I will show you who he is like. \bibleverse{48}
He is like a man building a house, who dug and went deep and laid a
foundation on the rock. When a flood arose, the stream broke against
that house, and could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock.
\bibleverse{49} But he who hears and doesn't do, is like a man who built
a house on the earth without a foundation, against which the stream
broke, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.''

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibleverse{1} After he had finished speaking in the hearing of the
people, he entered into Capernaum. \bibleverse{2} A certain centurion's
servant, who was dear to him, was sick and at the point of death.
\bibleverse{3} When he heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the
Jews, asking him to come and save his servant. \bibleverse{4} When they
came to Jesus, they begged him earnestly, saying, ``He is worthy for you
to do this for him, \bibleverse{5} for he loves our nation, and he built
our synagogue for us.'' \bibleverse{6} Jesus went with them. When he was
now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to
him, ``Lord, don't trouble yourself, for I am not worthy for you to come
under my roof. \bibleverse{7} Therefore I didn't even think myself
worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my servant will be healed.
\bibleverse{8} For I also am a man placed under authority, having under
myself soldiers. I tell this one, `Go!' and he goes; and to another,
`Come!' and he comes; and to my servant, `Do this,' and he does it.''

\bibleverse{9} When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and
turned and said to the multitude who followed him, ``I tell you, I have
not found such great faith, no, not in Israel.'' \bibleverse{10} Those
who were sent, returning to the house, found that the servant who had
been sick was well.

\bibleverse{11} Soon afterwards, he went to a city called Nain. Many of
his disciples, along with a great multitude, went with him.
\bibleverse{12} Now when he came near to the gate of the city, behold,
one who was dead was carried out, the only born\footnote{\textbf{7:12}
  The phrase ``only born'' is from the Greek word ``μονογενη'', which is
  sometimes translated ``only begotten'' or ``one and only''.} son of
his mother, and she was a widow. Many people of the city were with her.
\bibleverse{13} When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her and said
to her, ``Don't cry.'' \bibleverse{14} He came near and touched the
coffin, and the bearers stood still. He said, ``Young man, I tell you,
arise!'' \bibleverse{15} He who was dead sat up and began to speak. Then
he gave him to his mother.

\bibleverse{16} Fear took hold of all, and they glorified God, saying,
``A great prophet has arisen amongst us!'' and, ``God has visited his
people!'' \bibleverse{17} This report went out concerning him in the
whole of Judea and in all the surrounding region.

\bibleverse{18} The disciples of John told him about all these things.
\bibleverse{19} John, calling to himself two of his disciples, sent them
to Jesus, saying, ``Are you the one who is coming, or should we look for
another?'' \bibleverse{20} When the men had come to him, they said,
``John the Baptiser has sent us to you, saying, `Are you he who comes,
or should we look for another?'\,''

\bibleverse{21} In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and
evil spirits; and to many who were blind he gave sight. \bibleverse{22}
Jesus answered them, ``Go and tell John the things which you have seen
and heard: that the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have
good news preached to them. \bibleverse{23} Blessed is he who finds no
occasion for stumbling in me.''

\bibleverse{24} When John's messengers had departed, he began to tell
the multitudes about John, ``What did you go out into the wilderness to
see? A reed shaken by the wind? \bibleverse{25} But what did you go out
to see? A man clothed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are gorgeously
dressed and live delicately are in kings' courts. \bibleverse{26} But
what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more
than a prophet. \bibleverse{27} This is he of whom it is written,
`Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way
before you.'\footnote{\textbf{7:27} Malachi 3:1}

\bibleverse{28} ``For I tell you, amongst those who are born of women
there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptiser; yet he who is
least in God's Kingdom is greater than he.''

\bibleverse{29} When all the people and the tax collectors heard this,
they declared God to be just, having been baptised with John's baptism.
\bibleverse{30} But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel
of God, not being baptised by him themselves.

\bibleverse{31} \footnote{\textbf{7:31} TR adds ``But the Lord said,''}
``To what then should I compare the people of this generation? What are
they like? \bibleverse{32} They are like children who sit in the
marketplace and call to one another, saying, `We piped to you, and you
didn't dance. We mourned, and you didn't weep.' \bibleverse{33} For John
the Baptiser came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say,
`He has a demon.' \bibleverse{34} The Son of Man has come eating and
drinking, and you say, `Behold, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of
tax collectors and sinners!' \bibleverse{35} Wisdom is justified by all
her children.''

\bibleverse{36} One of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him. He
entered into the Pharisee's house and sat at the table. \bibleverse{37}
Behold, a woman in the city who was a sinner, when she knew that he was
reclining in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster jar of ointment.
\bibleverse{38} Standing behind at his feet weeping, she began to wet
his feet with her tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head,
kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. \bibleverse{39}
Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw it, he said to himself,
``This man, if he were a prophet, would have perceived who and what kind
of woman this is who touches him, that she is a sinner.''

\bibleverse{40} Jesus answered him, ``Simon, I have something to tell
you.''

He said, ``Teacher, say on.''

\bibleverse{41} ``A certain lender had two debtors. The one owed five
hundred denarii, and the other fifty. \bibleverse{42} When they couldn't
pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?''

\bibleverse{43} Simon answered, ``He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the
most.''

He said to him, ``You have judged correctly.'' \bibleverse{44} Turning
to the woman, he said to Simon, ``Do you see this woman? I entered into
your house, and you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my
feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head.
\bibleverse{45} You gave me no kiss, but she, since the time I came in,
has not ceased to kiss my feet. \bibleverse{46} You didn't anoint my
head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment.
\bibleverse{47} Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are
forgiven, for she loved much. But one to whom little is forgiven, loves
little.'' \bibleverse{48} He said to her, ``Your sins are forgiven.''

\bibleverse{49} Those who sat at the table with him began to say to
themselves, ``Who is this who even forgives sins?''

\bibleverse{50} He said to the woman, ``Your faith has saved you. Go in
peace.''

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibleverse{1} Soon afterwards, he went about through cities and
villages, preaching and bringing the good news of God's Kingdom. With
him were the twelve, \bibleverse{2} and certain women who had been
healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene,
from whom seven demons had gone out; \bibleverse{3} and Joanna, the wife
of Chuzas, Herod's steward; Susanna; and many others who served
them\footnote{\textbf{8:3} TR reads ``him'' instead of ``them''} from
their possessions. \bibleverse{4} When a great multitude came together
and people from every city were coming to him, he spoke by a parable:
\bibleverse{5} ``The farmer went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some
fell along the road, and it was trampled under foot, and the birds of
the sky devoured it. \bibleverse{6} Other seed fell on the rock, and as
soon as it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture.
\bibleverse{7} Other fell amid the thorns, and the thorns grew with it
and choked it. \bibleverse{8} Other fell into the good ground and grew
and produced one hundred times as much fruit.'' As he said these things,
he called out, ``He who has ears to hear, let him hear!''

\bibleverse{9} Then his disciples asked him, ``What does this parable
mean?''

\bibleverse{10} He said, ``To you it is given to know the mysteries of
God's Kingdom, but to the rest it is given in parables, that `seeing
they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.'\footnote{\textbf{8:10}
  Isaiah 6:9}

\bibleverse{11} ``Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
\bibleverse{12} Those along the road are those who hear; then the devil
comes and takes away the word from their heart, that they may not
believe and be saved. \bibleverse{13} Those on the rock are they who,
when they hear, receive the word with joy; but these have no root. They
believe for a while, then fall away in time of temptation.
\bibleverse{14} What fell amongst the thorns, these are those who have
heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares, riches,
and pleasures of life; and they bring no fruit to maturity.
\bibleverse{15} Those in the good ground, these are those who with an
honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it tightly, and
produce fruit with perseverance.

\bibleverse{16} ``No one, when he has lit a lamp, covers it with a
container or puts it under a bed; but puts it on a stand, that those who
enter in may see the light. \bibleverse{17} For nothing is hidden that
will not be revealed, nor anything secret that will not be known and
come to light. \bibleverse{18} Be careful therefore how you hear. For
whoever has, to him will be given; and whoever doesn't have, from him
will be taken away even that which he thinks he has.''

\bibleverse{19} His mother and brothers came to him, and they could not
come near him for the crowd. \bibleverse{20} Some people told him,
``Your mother and your brothers stand outside, desiring to see you.''

\bibleverse{21} But he answered them, ``My mother and my brothers are
these who hear the word of God and do it.''

\bibleverse{22} Now on one of those days, he entered into a boat,
himself and his disciples, and he said to them, ``Let's go over to the
other side of the lake.'' So they launched out. \bibleverse{23} But as
they sailed, he fell asleep. A wind storm came down on the lake, and
they were taking on dangerous amounts of water. \bibleverse{24} They
came to him and awoke him, saying, ``Master, Master, we are dying!'' He
awoke and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water; then they
ceased, and it was calm.\footnote{\textbf{8:24} See Psalm 107:29}
\bibleverse{25} He said to them, ``Where is your faith?'' Being afraid,
they marvelled, saying to one another, ``Who is this then, that he
commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?''

\bibleverse{26} Then they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which
is opposite Galilee. \bibleverse{27} When Jesus stepped ashore, a
certain man out of the city who had demons for a long time met him. He
wore no clothes, and didn't live in a house, but in the tombs.
\bibleverse{28} When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before
him, and with a loud voice said, ``What do I have to do with you, Jesus,
you Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don't torment me!''
\bibleverse{29} For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come out
of the man. For the unclean spirit had often seized the man. He was kept
under guard and bound with chains and fetters. Breaking the bonds apart,
he was driven by the demon into the desert.

\bibleverse{30} Jesus asked him, ``What is your name?''

He said, ``Legion,'' for many demons had entered into him.
\bibleverse{31} They begged him that he would not command them to go
into the abyss.

\bibleverse{32} Now there was there a herd of many pigs feeding on the
mountain, and they begged him that he would allow them to enter into
those. Then he allowed them. \bibleverse{33} The demons came out of the
man and entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank
into the lake and were drowned.

\bibleverse{34} When those who fed them saw what had happened, they fled
and told it in the city and in the country.

\bibleverse{35} People went out to see what had happened. They came to
Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at
Jesus' feet, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
\bibleverse{36} Those who saw it told them how he who had been possessed
by demons was healed. \bibleverse{37} All the people of the surrounding
country of the Gadarenes asked him to depart from them, for they were
very much afraid. Then he entered into the boat and returned.
\bibleverse{38} But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him
that he might go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
\bibleverse{39} ``Return to your house, and declare what great things
God has done for you.'' He went his way, proclaiming throughout the
whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.

\bibleverse{40} When Jesus returned, the multitude welcomed him, for
they were all waiting for him. \bibleverse{41} Behold, a man named
Jairus came. He was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at Jesus'
feet and begged him to come into his house, \bibleverse{42} for he had
an only born\footnote{\textbf{8:42} The phrase ``only born'' is from the
  Greek word ``μονογενη'', which is sometimes translated ``only
  begotten'' or ``one and only''.} daughter, about twelve years of age,
and she was dying. But as he went, the multitudes pressed against him.
\bibleverse{43} A woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years, who
had spent all her living on physicians and could not be healed by any,
\bibleverse{44} came behind him and touched the fringe\footnote{\textbf{8:44}
  or, tassel} of his cloak. Immediately the flow of her blood stopped.

\bibleverse{45} Jesus said, ``Who touched me?''

When all denied it, Peter and those with him said, ``Master, the
multitudes press and jostle you, and you say, `Who touched me?'\,''

\bibleverse{46} But Jesus said, ``Someone did touch me, for I perceived
that power has gone out of me.'' \bibleverse{47} When the woman saw that
she was not hidden, she came trembling; and falling down before him
declared to him in the presence of all the people the reason why she had
touched him, and how she was healed immediately. \bibleverse{48} He said
to her, ``Daughter, cheer up. Your faith has made you well. Go in
peace.''

\bibleverse{49} While he still spoke, one from the ruler of the
synagogue's house came, saying to him, ``Your daughter is dead. Don't
trouble the Teacher.''

\bibleverse{50} But Jesus hearing it, answered him, ``Don't be afraid.
Only believe, and she will be healed.''

\bibleverse{51} When he came to the house, he didn't allow anyone to
enter in, except Peter, John, James, the father of the child, and her
mother. \bibleverse{52} All were weeping and mourning her, but he said,
``Don't weep. She isn't dead, but sleeping.''

\bibleverse{53} They were ridiculing him, knowing that she was dead.
\bibleverse{54} But he put them all outside, and taking her by the hand,
he called, saying, ``Child, arise!'' \bibleverse{55} Her spirit
returned, and she rose up immediately. He commanded that something be
given to her to eat. \bibleverse{56} Her parents were amazed, but he
commanded them to tell no one what had been done.

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibleverse{1} He called the twelve\footnote{\textbf{9:1} TR reads ``his
  twelve disciples'' instead of ``the twelve''} together and gave them
power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.
\bibleverse{2} He sent them out to preach God's Kingdom and to heal the
sick. \bibleverse{3} He said to them, ``Take nothing for your
journey---no staffs, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money. Don't have two
tunics each. \bibleverse{4} Into whatever house you enter, stay there,
and depart from there. \bibleverse{5} As many as don't receive you, when
you depart from that city, shake off even the dust from your feet for a
testimony against them.''

\bibleverse{6} They departed and went throughout the villages, preaching
the Good News and healing everywhere.

\bibleverse{7} Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him;
and he was very perplexed, because it was said by some that John had
risen from the dead, \bibleverse{8} and by some that Elijah had
appeared, and by others that one of the old prophets had risen again.
\bibleverse{9} Herod said, ``I beheaded John, but who is this about whom
I hear such things?'' He sought to see him.

\bibleverse{10} The apostles, when they had returned, told him what
things they had done.

He took them and withdrew apart to a desert region of\footnote{\textbf{9:10}
  NU omits ``a desert region of''.} a city called Bethsaida.
\bibleverse{11} But the multitudes, perceiving it, followed him. He
welcomed them, spoke to them of God's Kingdom, and he cured those who
needed healing. \bibleverse{12} The day began to wear away; and the
twelve came and said to him, ``Send the multitude away, that they may go
into the surrounding villages and farms and lodge and get food, for we
are here in a deserted place.''

\bibleverse{13} But he said to them, ``You give them something to eat.''

They said, ``We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we
should go and buy food for all these people.'' \bibleverse{14} For they
were about five thousand men.

He said to his disciples, ``Make them sit down in groups of about fifty
each.'' \bibleverse{15} They did so, and made them all sit down.
\bibleverse{16} He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up
to the sky, he blessed them, broke them, and gave them to the disciples
to set before the multitude. \bibleverse{17} They ate and were all
filled. They gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left
over.

\bibleverse{18} As he was praying alone, the disciples were near him,
and he asked them, ``Who do the multitudes say that I am?''

\bibleverse{19} They answered, ``\,`John the Baptiser,' but others say,
`Elijah,' and others, that one of the old prophets has risen again.''

\bibleverse{20} He said to them, ``But who do you say that I am?''

Peter answered, ``The Christ of God.''

\bibleverse{21} But he warned them and commanded them to tell this to no
one, \bibleverse{22} saying, ``The Son of Man must suffer many things,
and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be
killed, and the third day be raised up.''

\bibleverse{23} He said to all, ``If anyone desires to come after me,
let him deny himself, take up his cross,\footnote{\textbf{9:23} TR, NU
  add ``daily''} and follow me. \bibleverse{24} For whoever desires to
save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life for my sake
will save it. \bibleverse{25} For what does it profit a man if he gains
the whole world, and loses or forfeits his own self? \bibleverse{26} For
whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son of
Man be ashamed when he comes in his glory, and the glory of the Father,
and of the holy angels. \bibleverse{27} But I tell you the truth: There
are some of those who stand here who will in no way taste of death until
they see God's Kingdom.''

\bibleverse{28} About eight days after these sayings, he took with him
Peter, John, and James, and went up onto the mountain to pray.
\bibleverse{29} As he was praying, the appearance of his face was
altered, and his clothing became white and dazzling. \bibleverse{30}
Behold, two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah,
\bibleverse{31} who appeared in glory and spoke of his
departure,\footnote{\textbf{9:31} literally, ``exodus''} which he was
about to accomplish at Jerusalem.

\bibleverse{32} Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with
sleep, but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two
men who stood with him. \bibleverse{33} As they were parting from him,
Peter said to Jesus, ``Master, it is good for us to be here. Let's make
three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah,'' not
knowing what he said.

\bibleverse{34} While he said these things, a cloud came and
overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
\bibleverse{35} A voice came out of the cloud, saying, ``This is my
beloved Son. Listen to him!'' \bibleverse{36} When the voice came, Jesus
was found alone. They were silent, and told no one in those days any of
the things which they had seen.

\bibleverse{37} On the next day, when they had come down from the
mountain, a great multitude met him. \bibleverse{38} Behold, a man from
the crowd called out, saying, ``Teacher, I beg you to look at my son,
for he is my only born\footnote{\textbf{9:38} The phrase ``only born''
  is from the Greek word ``μονογενη'', which is sometimes translated
  ``only begotten'' or ``one and only''.} child. \bibleverse{39} Behold,
a spirit takes him, he suddenly cries out, and it convulses him so that
he foams; and it hardly departs from him, bruising him severely.
\bibleverse{40} I begged your disciples to cast it out, and they
couldn't.''

\bibleverse{41} Jesus answered, ``Faithless and perverse generation, how
long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here.''

\bibleverse{42} While he was still coming, the demon threw him down and
convulsed him violently. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed
the boy, and gave him back to his father. \bibleverse{43} They were all
astonished at the majesty of God.

But while all were marvelling at all the things which Jesus did, he said
to his disciples, \bibleverse{44} ``Let these words sink into your ears,
for the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men.''
\bibleverse{45} But they didn't understand this saying. It was concealed
from them, that they should not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask
him about this saying.

\bibleverse{46} An argument arose amongst them about which of them was
the greatest. \bibleverse{47} Jesus, perceiving the reasoning of their
hearts, took a little child, and set him by his side, \bibleverse{48}
and said to them, ``Whoever receives this little child in my name
receives me. Whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For whoever
is least amongst you all, this one will be great.''

\bibleverse{49} John answered, ``Master, we saw someone casting out
demons in your name, and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow with
us.''

\bibleverse{50} Jesus said to him, ``Don't forbid him, for he who is not
against us is for us.''

\bibleverse{51} It came to pass, when the days were near that he should
be taken up, he intently set his face to go to Jerusalem \bibleverse{52}
and sent messengers before his face. They went and entered into a
village of the Samaritans, so as to prepare for him. \bibleverse{53}
They didn't receive him, because he was travelling with his face set
towards Jerusalem. \bibleverse{54} When his disciples, James and John,
saw this, they said, ``Lord, do you want us to command fire to come down
from the sky and destroy them, just as Elijah did?''

\bibleverse{55} But he turned and rebuked them, ``You don't know of what
kind of spirit you are. \bibleverse{56} For the Son of Man didn't come
to destroy men's lives, but to save them.''

They went to another village. \bibleverse{57} As they went on the way, a
certain man said to him, ``I want to follow you wherever you go, Lord.''

\bibleverse{58} Jesus said to him, ``The foxes have holes and the birds
of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his
head.''

\bibleverse{59} He said to another, ``Follow me!''

But he said, ``Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.''

\bibleverse{60} But Jesus said to him, ``Leave the dead to bury their
own dead, but you go and announce God's Kingdom.''

\bibleverse{61} Another also said, ``I want to follow you, Lord, but
first allow me to say good-bye to those who are at my house.''

\bibleverse{62} But Jesus said to him, ``No one, having put his hand to
the plough and looking back, is fit for God's Kingdom.''

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibleverse{1} Now after these things, the Lord also appointed seventy
others, and sent them two by two ahead of him\footnote{\textbf{10:1}
  literally, ``before his face''} into every city and place where he was
about to come. \bibleverse{2} Then he said to them, ``The harvest is
indeed plentiful, but the labourers are few. Pray therefore to the Lord
of the harvest, that he may send out labourers into his harvest.
\bibleverse{3} Go your ways. Behold, I send you out as lambs amongst
wolves. \bibleverse{4} Carry no purse, nor wallet, nor sandals. Greet no
one on the way. \bibleverse{5} Into whatever house you enter, first say,
`Peace be to this house.' \bibleverse{6} If a son of peace is there,
your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you.
\bibleverse{7} Remain in that same house, eating and drinking the things
they give, for the labourer is worthy of his wages. Don't go from house
to house. \bibleverse{8} Into whatever city you enter and they receive
you, eat the things that are set before you. \bibleverse{9} Heal the
sick who are there and tell them, `God's Kingdom has come near to you.'
\bibleverse{10} But into whatever city you enter and they don't receive
you, go out into its streets and say, \bibleverse{11} `Even the dust
from your city that clings to us, we wipe off against you. Nevertheless
know this, that God's Kingdom has come near to you.' \bibleverse{12} I
tell you, it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that
city.

\bibleverse{13} ``Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if
the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you,
they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
\bibleverse{14} But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the
judgement than for you. \bibleverse{15} You, Capernaum, who are exalted
to heaven, will be brought down to Hades. \footnote{\textbf{10:15} Hades
  is the lower realm of the dead, or Hell.} \bibleverse{16} Whoever
listens to you listens to me, and whoever rejects you rejects me.
Whoever rejects me rejects him who sent me.''

\bibleverse{17} The seventy returned with joy, saying, ``Lord, even the
demons are subject to us in your name!''

\bibleverse{18} He said to them, ``I saw Satan having fallen like
lightning from heaven. \bibleverse{19} Behold, I give you authority to
tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy.
Nothing will in any way hurt you. \bibleverse{20} Nevertheless, don't
rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that
your names are written in heaven.''

\bibleverse{21} In that same hour, Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit,
and said, ``I thank you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you
have hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed
them to little children. Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in
your sight.''

\bibleverse{22} Turning to the disciples, he said, ``All things have
been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is, except
the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whomever
the Son desires to reveal him.''

\bibleverse{23} Turning to the disciples, he said privately, ``Blessed
are the eyes which see the things that you see, \bibleverse{24} for I
tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which
you see, and didn't see them, and to hear the things which you hear, and
didn't hear them.''

\bibleverse{25} Behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tested him,
saying, ``Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?''

\bibleverse{26} He said to him, ``What is written in the law? How do you
read it?''

\bibleverse{27} He answered, ``You shall love the Lord your God with all
your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all
your mind;\footnote{\textbf{10:27} Deuteronomy 6:5} and your neighbour
as yourself.''\footnote{\textbf{10:27} Leviticus 19:18}

\bibleverse{28} He said to him, ``You have answered correctly. Do this,
and you will live.''

\bibleverse{29} But he, desiring to justify himself, asked Jesus, ``Who
is my neighbour?''

\bibleverse{30} Jesus answered, ``A certain man was going down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell amongst robbers, who both stripped him
and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead. \bibleverse{31} By
chance a certain priest was going down that way. When he saw him, he
passed by on the other side. \bibleverse{32} In the same way a Levite
also, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other
side. \bibleverse{33} But a certain Samaritan, as he travelled, came
where he was. When he saw him, he was moved with compassion,
\bibleverse{34} came to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and
wine. He set him on his own animal, brought him to an inn, and took care
of him. \bibleverse{35} On the next day, when he departed, he took out
two denarii, gave them to the host, and said to him, `Take care of him.
Whatever you spend beyond that, I will repay you when I return.'
\bibleverse{36} Now which of these three do you think seemed to be a
neighbour to him who fell amongst the robbers?''

\bibleverse{37} He said, ``He who showed mercy on him.''

Then Jesus said to him, ``Go and do likewise.''

\bibleverse{38} As they went on their way, he entered into a certain
village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
\bibleverse{39} She had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus'
feet and heard his word. \bibleverse{40} But Martha was distracted with
much serving, and she came up to him, and said, ``Lord, don't you care
that my sister left me to serve alone? Ask her therefore to help me.''

\bibleverse{41} Jesus answered her, ``Martha, Martha, you are anxious
and troubled about many things, \bibleverse{42} but one thing is needed.
Mary has chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her.''

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibleverse{1} When he finished praying in a certain place, one of his
disciples said to him, ``Lord, teach us to pray, just as John also
taught his disciples.''

\bibleverse{2} He said to them, ``When you pray, say, `Our Father in
heaven, may your name be kept holy. May your Kingdom come. May your will
be done on earth, as it is in heaven. \bibleverse{3} Give us day by day
our daily bread. \bibleverse{4} Forgive us our sins, for we ourselves
also forgive everyone who is indebted to us. Bring us not into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.'\,''

\bibleverse{5} He said to them, ``Which of you, if you go to a friend at
midnight and tell him, `Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
\bibleverse{6} for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I
have nothing to set before him,' \bibleverse{7} and he from within will
answer and say, `Don't bother me. The door is now shut, and my children
are with me in bed. I can't get up and give it to you'? \bibleverse{8} I
tell you, although he will not rise and give it to him because he is his
friend, yet because of his persistence, he will get up and give him as
many as he needs.

\bibleverse{9} ``I tell you, keep asking, and it will be given you. Keep
seeking, and you will find. Keep knocking, and it will be opened to you.
\bibleverse{10} For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To
him who knocks it will be opened.

\bibleverse{11} ``Which of you fathers, if your son asks for bread, will
give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he won't give him a snake
instead of a fish, will he? \bibleverse{12} Or if he asks for an egg, he
won't give him a scorpion, will he? \bibleverse{13} If you then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?''

\bibleverse{14} He was casting out a demon, and it was mute. When the
demon had gone out, the mute man spoke; and the multitudes marvelled.
\bibleverse{15} But some of them said, ``He casts out demons by
Beelzebul, the prince of the demons.'' \bibleverse{16} Others, testing
him, sought from him a sign from heaven. \bibleverse{17} But he, knowing
their thoughts, said to them, ``Every kingdom divided against itself is
brought to desolation. A house divided against itself falls.
\bibleverse{18} If Satan also is divided against himself, how will his
kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
\bibleverse{19} But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your
children cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.
\bibleverse{20} But if I by God's finger cast out demons, then God's
Kingdom has come to you.

\bibleverse{21} ``When the strong man, fully armed, guards his own
dwelling, his goods are safe. \bibleverse{22} But when someone stronger
attacks him and overcomes him, he takes from him his whole armour in
which he trusted, and divides his plunder.

\bibleverse{23} ``He who is not with me is against me. He who doesn't
gather with me scatters.

\bibleverse{24} The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of the man,
passes through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he says, `I
will turn back to my house from which I came out.' \bibleverse{25} When
he returns, he finds it swept and put in order. \bibleverse{26} Then he
goes and takes seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they
enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than
the first.''

\bibleverse{27} It came to pass, as he said these things, a certain
woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice and said to him,
``Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts which nursed you!''

\bibleverse{28} But he said, ``On the contrary, blessed are those who
hear the word of God, and keep it.''

\bibleverse{29} When the multitudes were gathering together to him, he
began to say, ``This is an evil generation. It seeks after a sign. No
sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet.
\bibleverse{30} For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so the
Son of Man will also be to this generation. \bibleverse{31} The Queen of
the South will rise up in the judgement with the men of this generation
and will condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear
the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, one greater than Solomon is here.
\bibleverse{32} The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgement with
this generation, and will condemn it, for they repented at the preaching
of Jonah; and behold, one greater than Jonah is here.

\bibleverse{33} ``No one, when he has lit a lamp, puts it in a cellar or
under a basket, but on a stand, that those who come in may see the
light. \bibleverse{34} The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore when
your eye is good, your whole body is also full of light; but when it is
evil, your body also is full of darkness. \bibleverse{35} Therefore see
whether the light that is in you isn't darkness. \bibleverse{36} If
therefore your whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will
be wholly full of light, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives
you light.''

\bibleverse{37} Now as he spoke, a certain Pharisee asked him to dine
with him. He went in and sat at the table. \bibleverse{38} When the
Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed himself
before dinner. \bibleverse{39} The Lord said to him, ``Now you Pharisees
cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but your inward part
is full of extortion and wickedness. \bibleverse{40} You foolish ones,
didn't he who made the outside make the inside also? \bibleverse{41} But
give for gifts to the needy those things which are within, and behold,
all things will be clean to you. \bibleverse{42} But woe to you
Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, but you bypass
justice and God's love. You ought to have done these, and not to have
left the other undone. \bibleverse{43} Woe to you Pharisees! For you
love the best seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the
marketplaces. \bibleverse{44} Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you are like hidden graves, and the men who walk over
them don't know it.''

\bibleverse{45} One of the lawyers answered him, ``Teacher, in saying
this you insult us also.''

\bibleverse{46} He said, ``Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men
with burdens that are difficult to carry, and you yourselves won't even
lift one finger to help carry those burdens. \bibleverse{47} Woe to you!
For you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
\bibleverse{48} So you testify and consent to the works of your fathers.
For they killed them, and you build their tombs. \bibleverse{49}
Therefore also the wisdom of God said, `I will send to them prophets and
apostles; and some of them they will kill and persecute, \bibleverse{50}
that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation
of the world, may be required of this generation, \bibleverse{51} from
the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the
altar and the sanctuary.' Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this
generation. \bibleverse{52} Woe to you lawyers! For you took away the
key of knowledge. You didn't enter in yourselves, and those who were
entering in, you hindered.''

\bibleverse{53} As he said these things to them, the scribes and the
Pharisees began to be terribly angry, and to draw many things out of
him, \bibleverse{54} lying in wait for him, and seeking to catch him in
something he might say, that they might accuse him.

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibleverse{1} Meanwhile, when a multitude of many thousands had
gathered together, so much so that they trampled on each other, he began
to tell his disciples first of all, ``Beware of the yeast of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. \bibleverse{2} But there is nothing
covered up that will not be revealed, nor hidden that will not be known.
\bibleverse{3} Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be
heard in the light. What you have spoken in the ear in the inner rooms
will be proclaimed on the housetops.

\bibleverse{4} ``I tell you, my friends, don't be afraid of those who
kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
\bibleverse{5} But I will warn you whom you should fear. Fear him who
after he has killed, has power to cast into Gehenna.\footnote{\textbf{12:5}
  or, Hell} Yes, I tell you, fear him.

\bibleverse{6} ``Aren't five sparrows sold for two assaria
coins\footnote{\textbf{12:6} An assarion was a small copper coin worth
  about an hour's wages for an agricultural labourer.} ? Not one of them
is forgotten by God. \bibleverse{7} But the very hairs of your head are
all counted. Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many
sparrows.

\bibleverse{8} ``I tell you, everyone who confesses me before men, the
Son of Man will also confess before the angels of God; \bibleverse{9}
but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the
presence of God's angels. \bibleverse{10} Everyone who speaks a word
against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but those who blaspheme against
the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven. \bibleverse{11} When they bring
you before the synagogues, the rulers, and the authorities, don't be
anxious how or what you will answer or what you will say;
\bibleverse{12} for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour
what you must say.''

\bibleverse{13} One of the multitude said to him, ``Teacher, tell my
brother to divide the inheritance with me.''

\bibleverse{14} But he said to him, ``Man, who made me a judge or an
arbitrator over you?'' \bibleverse{15} He said to them, ``Beware! Keep
yourselves from covetousness, for a man's life doesn't consist of the
abundance of the things which he possesses.''

\bibleverse{16} He spoke a parable to them, saying, ``The ground of a
certain rich man produced abundantly. \bibleverse{17} He reasoned within
himself, saying, `What will I do, because I don't have room to store my
crops?' \bibleverse{18} He said, `This is what I will do. I will pull
down my barns, build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain
and my goods. \bibleverse{19} I will tell my soul, ``Soul, you have many
goods laid up for many years. Take your ease, eat, drink, and be
merry.''\,'

\bibleverse{20} ``But God said to him, `You foolish one, tonight your
soul is required of you. The things which you have prepared---whose will
they be?' \bibleverse{21} So is he who lays up treasure for himself, and
is not rich towards God.''

\bibleverse{22} He said to his disciples, ``Therefore I tell you, don't
be anxious for your life, what you will eat, nor yet for your body, what
you will wear. \bibleverse{23} Life is more than food, and the body is
more than clothing. \bibleverse{24} Consider the ravens: they don't sow,
they don't reap, they have no warehouse or barn, and God feeds them. How
much more valuable are you than birds! \bibleverse{25} Which of you by
being anxious can add a cubit\footnote{\textbf{12:25} A cubit is the
  length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man's arm,
  or about 18 inches or 46 centimetres.} to his height? \bibleverse{26}
If then you aren't able to do even the least things, why are you anxious
about the rest? \bibleverse{27} Consider the lilies, how they grow. They
don't toil, neither do they spin; yet I tell you, even Solomon in all
his glory was not arrayed like one of these. \bibleverse{28} But if this
is how God clothes the grass in the field, which today exists and
tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O you
of little faith?

\bibleverse{29} ``Don't seek what you will eat or what you will drink;
neither be anxious. \bibleverse{30} For the nations of the world seek
after all of these things, but your Father knows that you need these
things. \bibleverse{31} But seek God's Kingdom, and all these things
will be added to you.

\bibleverse{32} ``Don't be afraid, little flock, for it is your Father's
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. \bibleverse{33} Sell what you
have and give gifts to the needy. Make for yourselves purses which don't
grow old, a treasure in the heavens that doesn't fail, where no thief
approaches and no moth destroys. \bibleverse{34} For where your treasure
is, there will your heart be also.

\bibleverse{35} ``Let your waist be dressed and your lamps burning.
\bibleverse{36} Be like men watching for their lord when he returns from
the wedding feast, that when he comes and knocks, they may immediately
open to him. \bibleverse{37} Blessed are those servants whom the lord
will find watching when he comes. Most certainly I tell you that he will
dress himself, make them recline, and will come and serve them.
\bibleverse{38} They will be blessed if he comes in the second or third
watch and finds them so. \bibleverse{39} But know this, that if the
master of the house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he
would have watched and not allowed his house to be broken into.
\bibleverse{40} Therefore be ready also, for the Son of Man is coming in
an hour that you don't expect him.''

\bibleverse{41} Peter said to him, ``Lord, are you telling this parable
to us, or to everybody?''

\bibleverse{42} The Lord said, ``Who then is the faithful and wise
steward, whom his lord will set over his household, to give them their
portion of food at the right times? \bibleverse{43} Blessed is that
servant whom his lord will find doing so when he comes. \bibleverse{44}
Truly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has.
\bibleverse{45} But if that servant says in his heart, `My lord delays
his coming,' and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants,
and to eat and drink and to be drunken, \bibleverse{46} then the lord of
that servant will come in a day when he isn't expecting him and in an
hour that he doesn't know, and will cut him in two, and place his
portion with the unfaithful. \bibleverse{47} That servant who knew his
lord's will, and didn't prepare nor do what he wanted, will be beaten
with many stripes, \bibleverse{48} but he who didn't know, and did
things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few stripes. To whomever
much is given, of him will much be required; and to whom much was
entrusted, of him more will be asked.

\bibleverse{49} ``I came to throw fire on the earth. I wish it were
already kindled. \bibleverse{50} But I have a baptism to be baptised
with, and how distressed I am until it is accomplished! \bibleverse{51}
Do you think that I have come to give peace in the earth? I tell you,
no, but rather division. \bibleverse{52} For from now on, there will be
five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
\bibleverse{53} They will be divided, father against son, and son
against father; mother against daughter, and daughter against her
mother; mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law.'' \footnote{\textbf{12:53} Micah 7:6}

\bibleverse{54} He said to the multitudes also, ``When you see a cloud
rising from the west, immediately you say, `A shower is coming,' and so
it happens. \bibleverse{55} When a south wind blows, you say, `There
will be a scorching heat,' and it happens. \bibleverse{56} You
hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and
the sky, but how is it that you don't interpret this time?

\bibleverse{57} ``Why don't you judge for yourselves what is right?
\bibleverse{58} For when you are going with your adversary before the
magistrate, try diligently on the way to be released from him, lest
perhaps he drag you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the
officer, and the officer throw you into prison. \bibleverse{59} I tell
you, you will by no means get out of there until you have paid the very
last penny.\footnote{\textbf{12:59} literally, lepton. A lepton is a
  very small brass Jewish coin worth half a Roman quadrans each, which
  is worth a quarter of the copper assarion. Lepta are worth less than 1
  of a day's wages for an agricultural labourer.} \bibleverse{3} He
said, ``Truly I tell you, this poor widow put in more than all of them,
\bibleverse{4} for all these put in gifts for God from their abundance,
but she, out of her poverty, put in all that she had to live on.''

\bibleverse{5} As some were talking about the temple and how it was
decorated with beautiful stones and gifts, he said, \bibleverse{6} ``As
for these things which you see, the days will come in which there will
not be left here one stone on another that will not be thrown down.''

\bibleverse{7} They asked him, ``Teacher, so when will these things be?
What is the sign that these things are about to happen?''

\bibleverse{8} He said, ``Watch out that you don't get led astray, for
many will come in my name, saying, `I am he\footnote{\textbf{21:8} or, I
  AM} ,' and, `The time is at hand.' Therefore don't follow them.
\bibleverse{9} When you hear of wars and disturbances, don't be
terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end won't come
immediately.''

\bibleverse{10} Then he said to them, ``Nation will rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom. \bibleverse{11} There will be great
earthquakes, famines, and plagues in various places. There will be
terrors and great signs from heaven. \bibleverse{12} But before all
these things, they will lay their hands on you and will persecute you,
delivering you up to synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings
and governors for my name's sake. \bibleverse{13} It will turn out as a
testimony for you. \bibleverse{14} Settle it therefore in your hearts
not to meditate beforehand how to answer, \bibleverse{15} for I will
give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able
to withstand or to contradict. \bibleverse{16} You will be handed over
even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends. They will cause some
of you to be put to death. \bibleverse{17} You will be hated by all men
for my name's sake. \bibleverse{18} And not a hair of your head will
perish.

\bibleverse{19} ``By your endurance you will win your lives.

\bibleverse{20} ``But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then
know that its desolation is at hand. \bibleverse{21} Then let those who
are in Judea flee to the mountains. Let those who are in the middle of
her depart. Let those who are in the country not enter therein.
\bibleverse{22} For these are days of vengeance, that all things which
are written may be fulfilled. \bibleverse{23} Woe to those who are
pregnant and to those who nurse infants in those days! For there will be
great distress in the land and wrath to this people. \bibleverse{24}
They will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led captive into
all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles until
the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.

\bibleverse{25} ``There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars; and
on the earth anxiety of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the
sea and the waves; \bibleverse{26} men fainting for fear and for
expectation of the things which are coming on the world, for the powers
of the heavens will be shaken. \bibleverse{27} Then they will see the
Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. \bibleverse{28}
But when these things begin to happen, look up and lift up your heads,
because your redemption is near.''

\bibleverse{29} He told them a parable. ``See the fig tree and all the
trees. \bibleverse{30} When they are already budding, you see it and
know by your own selves that the summer is already near. \bibleverse{31}
Even so you also, when you see these things happening, know that God's
Kingdom is near. \bibleverse{32} Most certainly I tell you, this
generation will not pass away until all things are accomplished.
\bibleverse{33} Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no
means pass away.

\bibleverse{34} ``So be careful, or your hearts will be loaded down with
carousing, drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day will come
on you suddenly. \bibleverse{35} For it will come like a snare on all
those who dwell on the surface of all the earth. \bibleverse{36}
Therefore be watchful all the time, praying that you may be counted
worthy to escape all these things that will happen, and to stand before
the Son of Man.''

\bibleverse{37} Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple, and every
night he would go out and spend the night on the mountain that is called
Olivet. \bibleverse{38} All the people came early in the morning to him
in the temple to hear him.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{22}\label{section-12}}

\bibleverse{1} Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the
Passover, was approaching. \bibleverse{2} The chief priests and the
scribes sought how they might put him to death, for they feared the
people.

\bibleverse{3} Satan entered into Judas, who was also called Iscariot,
who was counted with the twelve. \bibleverse{4} He went away and talked
with the chief priests and captains about how he might deliver him to
them. \bibleverse{5} They were glad, and agreed to give him money.
\bibleverse{6} He consented and sought an opportunity to deliver him to
them in the absence of the multitude.

\bibleverse{7} The day of unleavened bread came, on which the Passover
must be sacrificed. \bibleverse{8} Jesus sent Peter and John, saying,
``Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat.''

\bibleverse{9} They said to him, ``Where do you want us to prepare?''

\bibleverse{10} He said to them, ``Behold, when you have entered into
the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him
into the house which he enters. \bibleverse{11} Tell the master of the
house, `The Teacher says to you, ``Where is the guest room, where I may
eat the Passover with my disciples?''\,' \bibleverse{12} He will show
you a large, furnished upper room. Make preparations there.''

\bibleverse{13} They went, found things as Jesus had told them, and they
prepared the Passover.

\bibleverse{14} When the hour had come, he sat down with the twelve
apostles. \bibleverse{15} He said to them, ``I have earnestly desired to
eat this Passover with you before I suffer, \bibleverse{16} for I tell
you, I will no longer by any means eat of it until it is fulfilled in
God's Kingdom.'' \bibleverse{17} He received a cup, and when he had
given thanks, he said, ``Take this and share it amongst yourselves,
\bibleverse{18} for I tell you, I will not drink at all again from the
fruit of the vine, until God's Kingdom comes.''

\bibleverse{19} He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke
and gave it to them, saying, ``This is my body which is given for you.
Do this in memory of me.'' \bibleverse{20} Likewise, he took the cup
after supper, saying, ``This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which
is poured out for you. \bibleverse{21} But behold, the hand of him who
betrays me is with me on the table. \bibleverse{22} The Son of Man
indeed goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man through whom
he is betrayed!''

\bibleverse{23} They began to question amongst themselves which of them
it was who would do this thing.

\bibleverse{24} A dispute also arose amongst them, which of them was
considered to be greatest. \bibleverse{25} He said to them, ``The kings
of the nations lord it over them, and those who have authority over them
are called `benefactors.' \bibleverse{26} But not so with you. Rather,
the one who is greater amongst you, let him become as the younger, and
one who is governing, as one who serves. \bibleverse{27} For who is
greater, one who sits at the table, or one who serves? Isn't it he who
sits at the table? But I am amongst you as one who serves.

\bibleverse{28} ``But you are those who have continued with me in my
trials. \bibleverse{29} I confer on you a kingdom, even as my Father
conferred on me, \bibleverse{30} that you may eat and drink at my table
in my Kingdom. You will sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.''

\bibleverse{31} The Lord said, ``Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to
have all of you, that he might sift you as wheat, \bibleverse{32} but I
prayed for you, that your faith wouldn't fail. You, when once you have
turned again, establish your brothers.''\footnote{\textbf{22:32} The
  word for ``brothers'' here may be also correctly translated ``brothers
  and sisters'' or ``siblings.''}

\bibleverse{33} He said to him, ``Lord, I am ready to go with you both
to prison and to death!''

\bibleverse{34} He said, ``I tell you, Peter, the rooster will by no
means crow today until you deny that you know me three times.''

\bibleverse{35} He said to them, ``When I sent you out without purse,
bag, and sandals, did you lack anything?''

They said, ``Nothing.''

\bibleverse{36} Then he said to them, ``But now, whoever has a purse,
let him take it, and likewise a bag. Whoever has none, let him sell his
cloak, and buy a sword. \bibleverse{37} For I tell you that this which
is written must still be fulfilled in me: `He was counted with
transgressors.'\footnote{\textbf{22:37} Isaiah 53:12} For that which
concerns me is being fulfilled.''

\bibleverse{38} They said, ``Lord, behold, here are two swords.''

He said to them, ``That is enough.''

\bibleverse{39} He came out and went, as his custom was, to the Mount of
Olives. His disciples also followed him. \bibleverse{40} When he was at
the place, he said to them, ``Pray that you don't enter into
temptation.''

\bibleverse{41} He was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and he
knelt down and prayed, \bibleverse{42} saying, ``Father, if you are
willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours,
be done.''

\bibleverse{43} An angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
\bibleverse{44} Being in agony, he prayed more earnestly. His sweat
became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground.

\bibleverse{45} When he rose up from his prayer, he came to the
disciples and found them sleeping because of grief, \bibleverse{46} and
said to them, ``Why do you sleep? Rise and pray that you may not enter
into temptation.''

\bibleverse{47} While he was still speaking, a crowd appeared. He who
was called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He came near to
Jesus to kiss him. \bibleverse{48} But Jesus said to him, ``Judas, do
you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?''

\bibleverse{49} When those who were around him saw what was about to
happen, they said to him, ``Lord, shall we strike with the sword?''
\bibleverse{50} A certain one of them struck the servant of the high
priest, and cut off his right ear.

\bibleverse{51} But Jesus answered, ``Let me at least do this''---and he
touched his ear and healed him. \bibleverse{52} Jesus said to the chief
priests, captains of the temple, and elders, who had come against him,
``Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?
\bibleverse{53} When I was with you in the temple daily, you didn't
stretch out your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power
of darkness.''

\bibleverse{54} They seized him and led him away, and brought him into
the high priest's house. But Peter followed from a distance.
\bibleverse{55} When they had kindled a fire in the middle of the
courtyard and had sat down together, Peter sat amongst them.
\bibleverse{56} A certain servant girl saw him as he sat in the light,
and looking intently at him, said, ``This man also was with him.''

\bibleverse{57} He denied Jesus, saying, ``Woman, I don't know him.''

\bibleverse{58} After a little while someone else saw him and said,
``You also are one of them!''

But Peter answered, ``Man, I am not!''

\bibleverse{59} After about one hour passed, another confidently
affirmed, saying, ``Truly this man also was with him, for he is a
Galilean!''

\bibleverse{60} But Peter said, ``Man, I don't know what you are talking
about!'' Immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
\bibleverse{61} The Lord turned and looked at Peter. Then Peter
remembered the Lord's word, how he said to him, ``Before the rooster
crows you will deny me three times.'' \bibleverse{62} He went out, and
wept bitterly.

\bibleverse{63} The men who held Jesus mocked him and beat him.
\bibleverse{64} Having blindfolded him, they struck him on the face and
asked him, ``Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?'' \bibleverse{65}
They spoke many other things against him, insulting him.

\bibleverse{66} As soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders of the
people were gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they
led him away into their council, saying, \bibleverse{67} ``If you are
the Christ, tell us.''

But he said to them, ``If I tell you, you won't believe, \bibleverse{68}
and if I ask, you will in no way answer me or let me go. \bibleverse{69}
From now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the
power of God.''

\bibleverse{70} They all said, ``Are you then the Son of God?''

He said to them, ``You say it, because I am.''

\bibleverse{71} They said, ``Why do we need any more witness? For we
ourselves have heard from his own mouth!''

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{23}\label{section-13}}

\bibleverse{1} The whole company of them rose up and brought him before
Pilate. \bibleverse{2} They began to accuse him, saying, ``We found this
man perverting the nation, forbidding paying taxes to Caesar, and saying
that he himself is Christ, a king.''

\bibleverse{3} Pilate asked him, ``Are you the King of the Jews?''

He answered him, ``So you say.''

\bibleverse{4} Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, ``I
find no basis for a charge against this man.''

\bibleverse{5} But they insisted, saying, ``He stirs up the people,
teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this
place.''

\bibleverse{6} But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned, he asked if the
man was a Galilean. \bibleverse{7} When he found out that he was in
Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem
during those days.

\bibleverse{8} Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he
had wanted to see him for a long time, because he had heard many things
about him. He hoped to see some miracle done by him. \bibleverse{9} He
questioned him with many words, but he gave no answers. \bibleverse{10}
The chief priests and the scribes stood, vehemently accusing him.
\bibleverse{11} Herod with his soldiers humiliated him and mocked him.
Dressing him in luxurious clothing, they sent him back to Pilate.
\bibleverse{12} Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that
very day, for before that they were enemies with each other.

\bibleverse{13} Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers,
and the people, \bibleverse{14} and said to them, ``You brought this man
to me as one that perverts the people, and behold, having examined him
before you, I found no basis for a charge against this man concerning
those things of which you accuse him. \bibleverse{15} Neither has Herod,
for I sent you to him, and see, nothing worthy of death has been done by
him. \bibleverse{16} I will therefore chastise him and release him.''

\bibleverse{17} Now he had to release one prisoner to them at the
feast.\footnote{\textbf{23:17} NU omits verse 17.} \bibleverse{18} But
they all cried out together, saying, ``Away with this man! Release to us
Barabbas!''--- \bibleverse{19} one who was thrown into prison for a
certain revolt in the city, and for murder.

\bibleverse{20} Then Pilate spoke to them again, wanting to release
Jesus, \bibleverse{21} but they shouted, saying, ``Crucify! Crucify
him!''

\bibleverse{22} He said to them the third time, ``Why? What evil has
this man done? I have found no capital crime in him. I will therefore
chastise him and release him.'' \bibleverse{23} But they were urgent
with loud voices, asking that he might be crucified. Their voices and
the voices of the chief priests prevailed. \bibleverse{24} Pilate
decreed that what they asked for should be done. \bibleverse{25} He
released him who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and
murder, for whom they asked, but he delivered Jesus up to their will.

\bibleverse{26} When they led him away, they grabbed one Simon of
Cyrene, coming from the country, and laid the cross on him to carry it
after Jesus. \bibleverse{27} A great multitude of the people followed
him, including women who also mourned and lamented him. \bibleverse{28}
But Jesus, turning to them, said, ``Daughters of Jerusalem, don't weep
for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children. \bibleverse{29}
For behold, the days are coming in which they will say, `Blessed are the
barren, the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.'
\bibleverse{30} Then they will begin to tell the mountains, `Fall on
us!' and tell the hills, `Cover us.'\footnote{\textbf{23:30} Hosea 10:8}
\bibleverse{31} For if they do these things in the green tree, what will
be done in the dry?''

\bibleverse{32} There were also others, two criminals, led with him to
be put to death. \bibleverse{33} When they came to the place that is
called ``The Skull'', they crucified him there with the criminals, one
on the right and the other on the left.

\bibleverse{34} Jesus said, ``Father, forgive them, for they don't know
what they are doing.''

Dividing his garments amongst them, they cast lots. \bibleverse{35} The
people stood watching. The rulers with them also scoffed at him, saying,
``He saved others. Let him save himself, if this is the Christ of God,
his chosen one!''

\bibleverse{36} The soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering
him vinegar, \bibleverse{37} and saying, ``If you are the King of the
Jews, save yourself!''

\bibleverse{38} An inscription was also written over him in letters of
Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: ``THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.''

\bibleverse{39} One of the criminals who was hanged insulted him,
saying, ``If you are the Christ, save yourself and us!''

\bibleverse{40} But the other answered, and rebuking him said, ``Don't
you even fear God, seeing you are under the same condemnation?
\bibleverse{41} And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward for
our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong.'' \bibleverse{42} He
said to Jesus, ``Lord, remember me when you come into your Kingdom.''

\bibleverse{43} Jesus said to him, ``Assuredly I tell you, today you
will be with me in Paradise.''

\bibleverse{44} It was now about the sixth hour,\footnote{\textbf{23:44}
  Time was counted from sunrise, so the sixth hour was about noon.} and
darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.\footnote{\textbf{23:44}
  3:00 p.~m.} \bibleverse{45} The sun was darkened, and the veil of the
temple was torn in two. \bibleverse{46} Jesus, crying with a loud voice,
said, ``Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!'' Having said this,
he breathed his last.

\bibleverse{47} When the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God,
saying, ``Certainly this was a righteous man.'' \bibleverse{48} All the
multitudes that came together to see this, when they saw the things that
were done, returned home beating their breasts. \bibleverse{49} All his
acquaintances and the women who followed with him from Galilee stood at
a distance, watching these things.

\bibleverse{50} Behold, there was a man named Joseph, who was a member
of the council, a good and righteous man \bibleverse{51} (he had not
consented to their counsel and deed), from Arimathaea, a city of the
Jews, who was also waiting for God's Kingdom. \bibleverse{52} This man
went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body. \bibleverse{53} He took it
down and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb that was
cut in stone, where no one had ever been laid. \bibleverse{54} It was
the day of the Preparation, and the Sabbath was drawing near.
\bibleverse{55} The women who had come with him out of Galilee followed
after, and saw the tomb and how his body was laid. \bibleverse{56} They
returned and prepared spices and ointments. On the Sabbath they rested
according to the commandment.

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{24}\label{section-14}}

\bibleverse{1} But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they and
some others came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had
prepared. \bibleverse{2} They found the stone rolled away from the tomb.
\bibleverse{3} They entered in, and didn't find the Lord Jesus' body.
\bibleverse{4} While they were greatly perplexed about this, behold, two
men stood by them in dazzling clothing. \bibleverse{5} Becoming
terrified, they bowed their faces down to the earth.

The men said to them, ``Why do you seek the living amongst the dead?
\bibleverse{6} He isn't here, but is risen. Remember what he told you
when he was still in Galilee, \bibleverse{7} saying that the Son of Man
must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men and be crucified, and
the third day rise again?''

\bibleverse{8} They remembered his words, \bibleverse{9} returned from
the tomb, and told all these things to the eleven and to all the rest.
\bibleverse{10} Now they were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the
mother of James. The other women with them told these things to the
apostles. \bibleverse{11} These words seemed to them to be nonsense, and
they didn't believe them. \bibleverse{12} But Peter got up and ran to
the tomb. Stooping and looking in, he saw the strips of linen lying by
themselves, and he departed to his home, wondering what had happened.

\bibleverse{13} Behold, two of them were going that very day to a
village named Emmaus, which was sixty stadia\footnote{\textbf{24:13} 60
  stadia = about 11 kilometres or about 7 miles.} from Jerusalem.
\bibleverse{14} They talked with each other about all of these things
which had happened. \bibleverse{15} While they talked and questioned
together, Jesus himself came near, and went with them. \bibleverse{16}
But their eyes were kept from recognising him. \bibleverse{17} He said
to them, ``What are you talking about as you walk, and are sad?''

\bibleverse{18} One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, ``Are you the
only stranger in Jerusalem who doesn't know the things which have
happened there in these days?''

\bibleverse{19} He said to them, ``What things?''

They said to him, ``The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who was a
prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people;
\bibleverse{20} and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him
up to be condemned to death, and crucified him. \bibleverse{21} But we
were hoping that it was he who would redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all
this, it is now the third day since these things happened.
\bibleverse{22} Also, certain women of our company amazed us, having
arrived early at the tomb; \bibleverse{23} and when they didn't find his
body, they came saying that they had also seen a vision of angels, who
said that he was alive. \bibleverse{24} Some of us went to the tomb and
found it just like the women had said, but they didn't see him.''

\bibleverse{25} He said to them, ``Foolish people, and slow of heart to
believe in all that the prophets have spoken! \bibleverse{26} Didn't the
Christ have to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?''
\bibleverse{27} Beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he
explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.

\bibleverse{28} They came near to the village where they were going, and
he acted like he would go further.

\bibleverse{29} They urged him, saying, ``Stay with us, for it is almost
evening, and the day is almost over.''

He went in to stay with them. \bibleverse{30} When he had sat down at
the table with them, he took the bread and gave thanks. Breaking it, he
gave it to them. \bibleverse{31} Their eyes were opened and they
recognised him; then he vanished out of their sight. \bibleverse{32}
They said to one another, ``Weren't our hearts burning within us while
he spoke to us along the way, and while he opened the Scriptures to
us?'' \bibleverse{33} They rose up that very hour, returned to
Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and those who were
with them, \bibleverse{34} saying, ``The Lord is risen indeed, and has
appeared to Simon!'' \bibleverse{35} They related the things that
happened along the way, and how he was recognised by them in the
breaking of the bread.

\bibleverse{36} As they said these things, Jesus himself stood amongst
them, and said to them, ``Peace be to you.''

\bibleverse{37} But they were terrified and filled with fear, and
supposed that they had seen a spirit.

\bibleverse{38} He said to them, ``Why are you troubled? Why do doubts
arise in your hearts? \bibleverse{39} See my hands and my feet, that it
is truly me. Touch me and see, for a spirit doesn't have flesh and
bones, as you see that I have.'' \bibleverse{40} When he had said this,
he showed them his hands and his feet. \bibleverse{41} While they still
didn't believe for joy, and wondered, he said to them, ``Do you have
anything here to eat?''

\bibleverse{42} They gave him a piece of a broiled fish and some
honeycomb. \bibleverse{43} He took them, and ate in front of them.
\bibleverse{44} He said to them, ``This is what I told you while I was
still with you, that all things which are written in the law of Moses,
the prophets, and the psalms concerning me must be fulfilled.''

\bibleverse{45} Then he opened their minds, that they might understand
the Scriptures. \bibleverse{46} He said to them, ``Thus it is written,
and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the
dead the third day, \bibleverse{47} and that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning at
Jerusalem. \bibleverse{48} You are witnesses of these things.
\bibleverse{49} Behold, I send out the promise of my Father on you. But
wait in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on
high.''

\bibleverse{50} He led them out as far as Bethany, and he lifted up his
hands and blessed them. \bibleverse{51} While he blessed them, he
withdrew from them and was carried up into heaven. \bibleverse{52} They
worshipped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, \bibleverse{53}
and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
