\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} The first book I wrote, Theophilus, concerned all that
Jesus began both to do and to teach, \bibverse{2} until the day in which
he was received up, after he had given commandment through the Holy
Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen. \bibverse{3} To these he also
showed himself alive after he suffered, by many proofs, appearing to
them over a period of forty days and speaking about God's Kingdom.
\bibverse{4} Being assembled together with them, he commanded them,
``Don't depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father,
which you heard from me. \bibverse{5} For John indeed baptised in water,
but you will be baptised in the Holy Spirit not many days from now.''

\bibverse{6} Therefore, when they had come together, they asked him,
``Lord, are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?''

\bibverse{7} He said to them, ``It isn't for you to know times or
seasons which the Father has set within his own authority. \bibverse{8}
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you. You
will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to
the uttermost parts of the earth.''

\bibverse{9} When he had said these things, as they were looking, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. \bibverse{10}
While they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went,
behold,\footnote{1:10 ``Behold'', from ``ἰδοὺ'', means look at, take
  notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.}
two men stood by them in white clothing, \bibverse{11} who also said,
``You men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus,
who was received up from you into the sky, will come back in the same
way as you saw him going into the sky.''

\bibverse{12} Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called
Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.
\bibverse{13} When they had come in, they went up into the upper room
where they were staying, that is Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip,
Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the
Zealot, and Judas the son of James. \bibverse{14} All these with one
accord continued steadfastly in prayer and supplication, along with the
women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.

\bibverse{15} In these days, Peter stood up in the middle of the
disciples (and the number of names was about one hundred and twenty),
and said, \bibverse{16} ``Brothers, it was necessary that this Scripture
should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of
David concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus.
\bibverse{17} For he was counted with us, and received his portion in
this ministry. \bibverse{18} Now this man obtained a field with the
reward for his wickedness; and falling headlong, his body burst open and
all his intestines gushed out. \bibverse{19} It became known to everyone
who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called
`Akeldama,' that is, `The field of blood.' \bibverse{20} For it is
written in the book of Psalms, `Let his habitation be made desolate. Let
no one dwell in it;'\footnote{1:20 Psalm 69:25}

and, `Let another take his office.'\footnote{1:20 Psalm 109:8}

\bibverse{21} ``Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the
time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, \bibverse{22}
beginning from the baptism of John to the day that he was received up
from us, of these one must become a witness with us of his
resurrection.''

\bibverse{23} They put forward two: Joseph called Barsabbas, who was
also called Justus, and Matthias. \bibverse{24} They prayed and said,
``You, Lord, who know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two
you have chosen \bibverse{25} to take part in this ministry and
apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own
place.'' \bibverse{26} They drew lots for them, and the lot fell on
Matthias; and he was counted with the eleven apostles.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with
one accord in one place. \bibverse{2} Suddenly there came from the sky a
sound like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house
where they were sitting. \bibverse{3} Tongues like fire appeared and
were distributed to them, and one sat on each of them. \bibverse{4} They
were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak with other
languages, as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak.

\bibverse{5} Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from
every nation under the sky. \bibverse{6} When this sound was heard, the
multitude came together and were bewildered, because everyone heard them
speaking in his own language. \bibverse{7} They were all amazed and
marvelled, saying to one another, ``Behold, aren't all these who speak
Galileans? \bibverse{8} How do we hear, everyone in our own native
language? \bibverse{9} Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and people from
Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, \bibverse{10} Phrygia,
Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of Libya around Cyrene, visitors from Rome,
both Jews and proselytes, \bibverse{11} Cretans and Arabians---we hear
them speaking in our languages the mighty works of God!'' \bibverse{12}
They were all amazed and were perplexed, saying to one another, ``What
does this mean?'' \bibverse{13} Others, mocking, said, ``They are filled
with new wine.''

\bibverse{14} But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his
voice and spoke out to them, ``You men of Judea and all you who dwell at
Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words.
\bibverse{15} For these aren't drunken, as you suppose, seeing it is
only the third hour of the day.\footnote{2:15 about 9:00 a.m.}
\bibverse{16} But this is what has been spoken through the prophet Joel:
\bibverse{17} `It will be in the last days, says God, that I will pour
out my Spirit on all flesh. Your sons and your daughters will prophesy.
Your young men will see visions. Your old men will dream dreams.
\bibverse{18} Yes, and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those
days, I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy. \bibverse{19} I
will show wonders in the sky above, and signs on the earth beneath:
blood, and fire, and billows of smoke. \bibverse{20} The sun will be
turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and
glorious day of the Lord comes. \bibverse{21} It will be that whoever
will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.'+ 2:21 Joel 2:28-32

\bibverse{22} ``Men of Israel, hear these words! Jesus of Nazareth, a
man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which
God did by him amongst you, even as you yourselves know, \bibverse{23}
him, being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of
God, you have taken by the hand of lawless men, crucified and killed;
\bibverse{24} whom God raised up, having freed him from the agony of
death, because it was not possible that he should be held by it.
\bibverse{25} For David says concerning him, `I saw the Lord always
before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
\bibverse{26} Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced.
Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope, \bibverse{27} because you
will not leave my soul in Hades,\footnote{2:27 or, Hell} neither will
you allow your Holy One to see decay. \bibverse{28} You made known to me
the ways of life. You will make me full of gladness with your
presence.'+ 2:28 Psalm 16:8-11

\bibverse{29} ``Brothers, I may tell you freely of the patriarch David,
that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
\bibverse{30} Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn
with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the
flesh, he would raise up the Christ\footnote{2:30 ``Christ'' means
  ``Anointed One''.} to sit on his throne, \bibverse{31} he foreseeing
this, spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that his soul wasn't
left in Hades,+ 2:31 or, Hell and his flesh didn't see decay.
\bibverse{32} This Jesus God raised up, to which we all are witnesses.
\bibverse{33} Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and
having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has
poured out this which you now see and hear. \bibverse{34} For David
didn't ascend into the heavens, but he says himself, `The Lord said to
my Lord, ``Sit by my right hand \bibverse{35} until I make your enemies
a footstool for your feet.''\,'+ 2:35 Psalm 110:1

\bibverse{36} ``Let all the house of Israel therefore know certainly
that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you
crucified.''

\bibverse{37} Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and
said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, ``Brothers, what shall we
do?''

\bibverse{38} Peter said to them, ``Repent and be baptised, every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and you
will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. \bibverse{39} For the promise
is to you and to your children, and to all who are far off, even as many
as the Lord our God will call to himself.'' \bibverse{40} With many
other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, ``Save yourselves
from this crooked generation!''

\bibverse{41} Then those who gladly received his word were baptised.
There were added that day about three thousand souls. \bibverse{42} They
continued steadfastly in the apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the
breaking of bread, and prayer. \bibverse{43} Fear came on every soul,
and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles. \bibverse{44}
All who believed were together, and had all things in common.
\bibverse{45} They sold their possessions and goods, and distributed
them to all, according as anyone had need. \bibverse{46} Day by day,
continuing steadfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread
at home, they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart,
\bibverse{47} praising God and having favour with all the people. The
Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were being saved.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of
prayer, the ninth hour.\footnote{3:1 3:00 p.m.} \bibverse{2} A certain
man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they
laid daily at the door of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask
gifts for the needy of those who entered into the temple. \bibverse{3}
Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive
gifts for the needy. \bibverse{4} Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with
John, said, ``Look at us.'' \bibverse{5} He listened to them, expecting
to receive something from them. \bibverse{6} But Peter said, ``I have no
silver or gold, but what I have, that I give you. In the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk!'' \bibverse{7} He took him by the
right hand and raised him up. Immediately his feet and his ankle bones
received strength. \bibverse{8} Leaping up, he stood and began to walk.
He entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising
God. \bibverse{9} All the people saw him walking and praising God.
\bibverse{10} They recognised him, that it was he who used to sit
begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple.
They were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
\bibverse{11} As the lame man who was healed held on to Peter and John,
all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called
Solomon's, greatly wondering.

\bibverse{12} When Peter saw it, he responded to the people, ``You men
of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you fasten your eyes on
us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk?
\bibverse{13} The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our
fathers, has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered up and
denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to release him.
\bibverse{14} But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked for a
murderer to be granted to you, \bibverse{15} and killed the Prince of
life, whom God raised from the dead, to which we are witnesses.
\bibverse{16} By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong,
whom you see and know. Yes, the faith which is through him has given him
this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.

\bibverse{17} ``Now, brothers,\footnote{3:17 The word for ``brothers''
  here may be also correctly translated ``brothers and sisters'' or
  ``siblings.''} I know that you did this in ignorance, as did also your
rulers. \bibverse{18} But the things which God announced by the mouth of
all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled.

\bibverse{19} ``Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be
blotted out, so that there may come times of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord, \bibverse{20} and that he may send Christ Jesus,
who was ordained for you before, \bibverse{21} whom heaven must receive
until the times of restoration of all things, which God spoke long ago
by the mouth of his holy prophets. \bibverse{22} For Moses indeed said
to the fathers, `The Lord God will raise up a prophet for you from
amongst your brothers, like me. You shall listen to him in all things
whatever he says to you. \bibverse{23} It will be that every soul that
will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from amongst
the people.'\footnote{3:23 Deuteronomy 18:15,18-19} \bibverse{24} Yes,
and all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed after, as many
as have spoken, also told of these days. \bibverse{25} You are the
children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our
fathers, saying to Abraham, `All the families of the earth will be
blessed through your offspring.'+ 3:25 or, seed+ 3:25 Genesis 22:18;
26:4 \bibverse{26} God, having raised up his servant Jesus, sent him to
you first to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your
wickedness.''

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} As they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of
the temple and the Sadducees came to them, \bibverse{2} being upset
because they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection
from the dead. \bibverse{3} They laid hands on them, and put them in
custody until the next day, for it was now evening. \bibverse{4} But
many of those who heard the word believed, and the number of the men
came to be about five thousand.

\bibverse{5} In the morning, their rulers, elders, and scribes were
gathered together in Jerusalem. \bibverse{6} Annas the high priest was
there, with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were relatives of
the high priest. \bibverse{7} When they had stood Peter and John in the
middle of them, they enquired, ``By what power, or in what name, have
you done this?''

\bibverse{8} Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them,
``You rulers of the people and elders of Israel, \bibverse{9} if we are
examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what
means this man has been healed, \bibverse{10} may it be known to you
all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ
of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, this man
stands here before you whole in him. \bibverse{11} He is `the stone
which was regarded as worthless by you, the builders, which has become
the head of the corner.'\footnote{4:11 Psalm 118:22} \bibverse{12} There
is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven
that is given amongst men, by which we must be saved!''

\bibverse{13} Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and had
perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled.
They recognised that they had been with Jesus. \bibverse{14} Seeing the
man who was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against
it. \bibverse{15} But when they had commanded them to go aside out of
the council, they conferred amongst themselves, \bibverse{16} saying,
``What shall we do to these men? Because indeed a notable miracle has
been done through them, as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in
Jerusalem, and we can't deny it. \bibverse{17} But so that this spreads
no further amongst the people, let's threaten them, that from now on
they don't speak to anyone in this name.'' \bibverse{18} They called
them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of
Jesus.

\bibverse{19} But Peter and John answered them, ``Whether it is right in
the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for
yourselves, \bibverse{20} for we can't help telling the things which we
saw and heard.''

\bibverse{21} When they had further threatened them, they let them go,
finding no way to punish them, because of the people; for everyone
glorified God for that which was done. \bibverse{22} For the man on whom
this miracle of healing was performed was more than forty years old.

\bibverse{23} Being let go, they came to their own company and reported
all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
\bibverse{24} When they heard it, they lifted up their voice to God with
one accord and said, ``O Lord, you are God, who made the heaven, the
earth, the sea, and all that is in them; \bibverse{25} who by the mouth
of your servant David, said, `Why do the nations rage, and the peoples
plot a vain thing? \bibverse{26} The kings of the earth take a stand,
and the rulers take council together, against the Lord, and against his
Christ.'\footnote{4:26 Christ (Greek) and Messiah (Hebrew) both mean
  Anointed One.}+ 4:26 Psalm 2:1-2

\bibverse{27} ``For truly,\footnote{4:27 nu adds ``in this city,''} both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel,
were gathered together against your holy servant Jesus, whom you
anointed, \bibverse{28} to do whatever your hand and your council
foreordained to happen. \bibverse{29} Now, Lord, look at their threats,
and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness,
\bibverse{30} while you stretch out your hand to heal; and that signs
and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant Jesus.''

\bibverse{31} When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
gathered together. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they
spoke the word of God with boldness.

\bibverse{32} The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and
soul. Not one of them claimed that anything of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had all things in common. \bibverse{33}
With great power, the apostles gave their testimony of the resurrection
of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on them all. \bibverse{34} For
neither was there amongst them any who lacked, for as many as were
owners of lands or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the
things that were sold, \bibverse{35} and laid them at the apostles'
feet; and distribution was made to each, according as anyone had need.

\bibverse{36} Joses, who by the apostles was also called Barnabas (which
is, being interpreted, Son of Encouragement), a Levite, a man of Cyprus
by race, \bibverse{37} having a field, sold it and brought the money and
laid it at the apostles' feet.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife,
sold a possession, \bibverse{2} and kept back part of the price, his
wife also being aware of it, then brought a certain part and laid it at
the apostles' feet. \bibverse{3} But Peter said, ``Ananias, why has
Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back part
of the price of the land? \bibverse{4} While you kept it, didn't it
remain your own? After it was sold, wasn't it in your power? How is it
that you have conceived this thing in your heart? You haven't lied to
men, but to God.''

\bibverse{5} Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and died. Great
fear came on all who heard these things. \bibverse{6} The young men
arose and wrapped him up, and they carried him out and buried him.
\bibverse{7} About three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had
happened, came in. \bibverse{8} Peter answered her, ``Tell me whether
you sold the land for so much.''

She said, ``Yes, for so much.''

\bibverse{9} But Peter asked her, ``How is it that you have agreed
together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who
have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.''

\bibverse{10} She fell down immediately at his feet and died. The young
men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her
by her husband. \bibverse{11} Great fear came on the whole assembly, and
on all who heard these things.

\bibverse{12} By the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were
done amongst the people. They were all with one accord in Solomon's
porch. \bibverse{13} None of the rest dared to join them; however, the
people honoured them. \bibverse{14} More believers were added to the
Lord, multitudes of both men and women. \bibverse{15} They even carried
out the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mattresses, so
that as Peter came by, at least his shadow might overshadow some of
them. \bibverse{16} The multitude also came together from the cities
around Jerusalem, bringing sick people and those who were tormented by
unclean spirits; and they were all healed.

\bibverse{17} But the high priest rose up, and all those who were with
him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with
jealousy \bibverse{18} and laid hands on the apostles, then put them in
public custody. \bibverse{19} But an angel of the Lord opened the prison
doors by night, and brought them out and said, \bibverse{20} ``Go stand
and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.''

\bibverse{21} When they heard this, they entered into the temple about
daybreak and taught. But the high priest and those who were with him
came and called the council together, with all the senate of the
children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.
\bibverse{22} But the officers who came didn't find them in the prison.
They returned and reported, \bibverse{23} ``We found the prison shut and
locked, and the guards standing before the doors, but when we opened
them, we found no one inside!''

\bibverse{24} Now when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and
the chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them
and what might become of this. \bibverse{25} One came and told them,
``Behold, the men whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and
teaching the people.'' \bibverse{26} Then the captain went with the
officers, and brought them without violence, for they were afraid that
the people might stone them.

\bibverse{27} When they had brought them, they set them before the
council. The high priest questioned them, \bibverse{28} saying, ``Didn't
we strictly command you not to teach in this name? Behold, you have
filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and intend to bring this man's
blood on us.''

\bibverse{29} But Peter and the apostles answered, ``We must obey God
rather than men. \bibverse{30} The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom you killed, hanging him on a tree. \bibverse{31} God exalted him
with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance to
Israel, and remission of sins. \bibverse{32} We are his witnesses of
these things; and so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to
those who obey him.''

\bibverse{33} But they, when they heard this, were cut to the heart, and
were determined to kill them. \bibverse{34} But one stood up in the
council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honoured by
all the people, and commanded to put the apostles out for a little
while. \bibverse{35} He said to them, ``You men of Israel, be careful
concerning these men, what you are about to do. \bibverse{36} For before
these days Theudas rose up, making himself out to be somebody; to whom a
number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves. He was slain; and
all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed and came to nothing.
\bibverse{37} After this man, Judas of Galilee rose up in the days of
the enrolment, and drew away some people after him. He also perished,
and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad. \bibverse{38} Now
I tell you, withdraw from these men and leave them alone. For if this
counsel or this work is of men, it will be overthrown. \bibverse{39} But
if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow it, and you would be
found even to be fighting against God!''

\bibverse{40} They agreed with him. Summoning the apostles, they beat
them and commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them
go. \bibverse{41} They therefore departed from the presence of the
council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonour for
Jesus' name.

\bibverse{42} Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped
teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibverse{1} Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was
multiplying, a complaint arose from the Hellenists\footnote{6:1 The
  Hellenists used Greek language and culture, even though they were also
  of Hebrew descent.} against the Hebrews, because their widows were
neglected in the daily service. \bibverse{2} The twelve summoned the
multitude of the disciples and said, ``It is not appropriate for us to
forsake the word of God and serve tables. \bibverse{3} Therefore, select
from amongst you, brothers, seven men of good report, full of the Holy
Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.
\bibverse{4} But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the
ministry of the word.''

\bibverse{5} These words pleased the whole multitude. They chose
Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus,
Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch,
\bibverse{6} whom they set before the apostles. When they had prayed,
they laid their hands on them.

\bibverse{7} The word of God increased and the number of the disciples
greatly multiplied in Jerusalem. A great company of the priests were
obedient to the faith.

\bibverse{8} Stephen, full of faith and power, performed great wonders
and signs amongst the people. \bibverse{9} But some of those who were of
the synagogue called ``The Libertines'', and of the Cyrenians, of the
Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with
Stephen. \bibverse{10} They weren't able to withstand the wisdom and the
Spirit by which he spoke. \bibverse{11} Then they secretly induced men
to say, ``We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and
God.'' \bibverse{12} They stirred up the people, the elders, and the
scribes, and came against him and seized him, then brought him in to the
council, \bibverse{13} and set up false witnesses who said, ``This man
never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the
law. \bibverse{14} For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth
will destroy this place, and will change the customs which Moses
delivered to us.'' \bibverse{15} All who sat in the council, fastening
their eyes on him, saw his face like it was the face of an angel.

\hypertarget{section-6}{%
\section{7}\label{section-6}}

\bibverse{1} The high priest said, ``Are these things so?''

\bibverse{2} He said, ``Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory
appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he
lived in Haran, \bibverse{3} and said to him, `Get out of your land and
away from your relatives, and come into a land which I will show
you.'\footnote{7:3 Genesis 12:1} \bibverse{4} Then he came out of the
land of the Chaldaeans and lived in Haran. From there, when his father
was dead, God moved him into this land where you are now living.
\bibverse{5} He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set
his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him for a possession,
and to his offspring after him, when he still had no child. \bibverse{6}
God spoke in this way: that his offspring would live as aliens in a
strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four
hundred years. \bibverse{7} `I will judge the nation to which they will
be in bondage,' said God, `and after that they will come out and serve
me in this place.'+ 7:7 Genesis 15:13-14 \bibverse{8} He gave him the
covenant of circumcision. So Abraham became the father of Isaac, and
circumcised him the eighth day. Isaac became the father of Jacob, and
Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.

\bibverse{9} ``The patriarchs, moved with jealousy against Joseph, sold
him into Egypt. God was with him \bibverse{10} and delivered him out of
all his afflictions, and gave him favour and wisdom before Pharaoh, king
of Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house.
\bibverse{11} Now a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan,
and great affliction. Our fathers found no food. \bibverse{12} But when
Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers the
first time. \bibverse{13} On the second time Joseph was made known to
his brothers, and Joseph's family was revealed to Pharaoh. \bibverse{14}
Joseph sent and summoned Jacob his father and all his relatives,
seventy-five souls. \bibverse{15} Jacob went down into Egypt and he
died, himself and our fathers; \bibverse{16} and they were brought back
to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in
silver from the children of Hamor of Shechem.

\bibverse{17} ``But as the time of the promise came close which God had
sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, \bibverse{18}
until there arose a different king who didn't know Joseph. \bibverse{19}
The same took advantage of our race and mistreated our fathers, and
forced them to abandon their babies, so that they wouldn't stay alive.
\bibverse{20} At that time Moses was born, and was exceedingly handsome
to God. He was nourished three months in his father's house.
\bibverse{21} When he was abandoned, Pharaoh's daughter took him up and
reared him as her own son. \bibverse{22} Moses was instructed in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians. He was mighty in his words and works.
\bibverse{23} But when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to
visit his brothers,\footnote{7:23 The word for ``brothers'' here and
  where the context allows may be also correctly translated ``brothers
  and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} the children of Israel. \bibverse{24}
Seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him and avenged him who was
oppressed, striking the Egyptian. \bibverse{25} He supposed that his
brothers understood that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance;
but they didn't understand.

\bibverse{26} ``The day following, he appeared to them as they fought,
and urged them to be at peace again, saying, `Sirs, you are brothers.
Why do you wrong one another?' \bibverse{27} But he who did his
neighbour wrong pushed him away, saying, `Who made you a ruler and a
judge over us? \bibverse{28} Do you want to kill me as you killed the
Egyptian yesterday?'\footnote{7:28 Exodus 2:14} \bibverse{29} Moses fled
at this saying, and became a stranger in the land of Midian, where he
became the father of two sons.

\bibverse{30} ``When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord
appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in
a bush. \bibverse{31} When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. As he
came close to see, the voice of the Lord came to him, \bibverse{32} `I
am the God of your fathers: the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob.'\footnote{7:32 Exodus 3:6} Moses trembled and dared
not look. \bibverse{33} The Lord said to him, `Take off your sandals,
for the place where you stand is holy ground. \bibverse{34} I have
surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard
their groaning. I have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send
you into Egypt.'+ 7:34 Exodus 3:5,7-8,10

\bibverse{35} ``This Moses whom they refused, saying, `Who made you a
ruler and a judge?'---God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer
by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush. \bibverse{36}
This man led them out, having worked wonders and signs in Egypt, in the
Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years. \bibverse{37} This is
that Moses who said to the children of Israel, `The Lord our God will
raise up a prophet for you from amongst your brothers, like
me.'\footnote{7:37 TR adds ``You shall listen to him.''}+ 7:37
Deuteronomy 18:15 \bibverse{38} This is he who was in the assembly in
the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with
our fathers, who received living revelations to give to us,
\bibverse{39} to whom our fathers wouldn't be obedient, but rejected him
and turned back in their hearts to Egypt, \bibverse{40} saying to Aaron,
`Make us gods that will go before us, for as for this Moses who led us
out of the land of Egypt, we don't know what has become of him.'+ 7:40
Exodus 32:1 \bibverse{41} They made a calf in those days, and brought a
sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.
\bibverse{42} But God turned away and gave them up to serve the army of
the sky,+ 7:42 This idiom could also be translated ``host of heaven'',
or ``angelic beings'', or ``heavenly bodies.'' as it is written in the
book of the prophets, `Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices
forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel? \bibverse{43} You took
up the tabernacle of Moloch, the star of your god Rephan, the figures
which you made to worship, so I will carry you away+ 7:43 Amos 5:25-27
beyond Babylon.'

\bibverse{44} ``Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the
wilderness, even as he who spoke to Moses commanded him to make it
according to the pattern that he had seen; \bibverse{45} which also our
fathers, in their turn, brought in with Joshua when they entered into
the possession of the nations whom God drove out before the face of our
fathers to the days of David, \bibverse{46} who found favour in the
sight of God, and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
\bibverse{47} But Solomon built him a house. \bibverse{48} However, the
Most High doesn't dwell in temples made with hands, as the prophet says,
\bibverse{49} `heaven is my throne, and the earth a footstool for my
feet. What kind of house will you build me?' says the Lord. `Or what is
the place of my rest? \bibverse{50} Didn't my hand make all these
things?'\footnote{7:50 Isaiah 66:1-2}

\bibverse{51} ``You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears,
you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do.
\bibverse{52} Which of the prophets didn't your fathers persecute? They
killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you
have now become betrayers and murderers. \bibverse{53} You received the
law as it was ordained by angels, and didn't keep it!''

\bibverse{54} Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the
heart, and they gnashed at him with their teeth. \bibverse{55} But he,
being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven and saw
the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
\bibverse{56} and said, ``Behold, I see the heavens opened and the Son
of Man standing at the right hand of God!''

\bibverse{57} But they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their
ears, then rushed at him with one accord. \bibverse{58} They threw him
out of the city and stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at
the feet of a young man named Saul. \bibverse{59} They stoned Stephen as
he called out, saying, ``Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!'' \bibverse{60}
He knelt down and cried with a loud voice, ``Lord, don't hold this sin
against them!'' When he had said this, he fell asleep.

\hypertarget{section-7}{%
\section{8}\label{section-7}}

\bibverse{1} Saul was consenting to his death. A great persecution arose
against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day. They were all
scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except for
the apostles. \bibverse{2} Devout men buried Stephen and lamented
greatly over him. \bibverse{3} But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering
into every house and dragged both men and women off to prison.
\bibverse{4} Therefore those who were scattered abroad went around
preaching the word. \bibverse{5} Philip went down to the city of Samaria
and proclaimed to them the Christ. \bibverse{6} The multitudes listened
with one accord to the things that were spoken by Philip when they heard
and saw the signs which he did. \bibverse{7} For unclean spirits came
out of many of those who had them. They came out, crying with a loud
voice. Many who had been paralysed and lame were healed. \bibverse{8}
There was great joy in that city.

\bibverse{9} But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who used to
practise sorcery in the city and amazed the people of Samaria, making
himself out to be some great one, \bibverse{10} to whom they all
listened, from the least to the greatest, saying, ``This man is that
great power of God.'' \bibverse{11} They listened to him because for a
long time he had amazed them with his sorceries. \bibverse{12} But when
they believed Philip preaching good news concerning God's Kingdom and
the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptised, both men and women.
\bibverse{13} Simon himself also believed. Being baptised, he continued
with Philip. Seeing signs and great miracles occurring, he was amazed.

\bibverse{14} Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that
Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them,
\bibverse{15} who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they
might receive the Holy Spirit; \bibverse{16} for as yet he had fallen on
none of them. They had only been baptised in the name of Christ Jesus.
\bibverse{17} Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the
Holy Spirit. \bibverse{18} Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was
given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them
money, \bibverse{19} saying, ``Give me also this power, that whomever I
lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit.'' \bibverse{20} But Peter
said to him, ``May your silver perish with you, because you thought you
could obtain the gift of God with money! \bibverse{21} You have neither
part nor lot in this matter, for your heart isn't right before God.
\bibverse{22} Repent therefore of this, your wickedness, and ask God if
perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you. \bibverse{23} For
I see that you are in the poison of bitterness and in the bondage of
iniquity.''

\bibverse{24} Simon answered, ``Pray for me to the Lord, that none of
the things which you have spoken happen to me.''

\bibverse{25} They therefore, when they had testified and spoken the
word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the Good News to
many villages of the Samaritans.

\bibverse{26} Then an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying,
``Arise, and go towards the south to the way that goes down from
Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert.''

\bibverse{27} He arose and went; and behold, there was a man of
Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the
Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to
worship. \bibverse{28} He was returning and sitting in his chariot, and
was reading the prophet Isaiah.

\bibverse{29} The Spirit said to Philip, ``Go near, and join yourself to
this chariot.''

\bibverse{30} Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the
prophet, and said, ``Do you understand what you are reading?''

\bibverse{31} He said, ``How can I, unless someone explains it to me?''
He begged Philip to come up and sit with him. \bibverse{32} Now the
passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this, ``He was led as
a sheep to the slaughter. As a lamb before his shearer is silent, so he
doesn't open his mouth. \bibverse{33} In his humiliation, his judgement
was taken away. Who will declare His generation? For his life is taken
from the earth.''\footnote{8:33 Isaiah 53:7,8}

\bibverse{34} The eunuch answered Philip, ``Who is the prophet talking
about? About himself, or about someone else?''

\bibverse{35} Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this
Scripture, preached to him about Jesus. \bibverse{36} As they went on
the way, they came to some water; and the eunuch said, ``Behold, here is
water. What is keeping me from being baptised?''

\bibverse{37} \footnote{8:37 TR adds Philip said, ``If you believe with
  all your heart, you may.'' He answered, ``I believe that Jesus Christ
  is the Son of God.''} \bibverse{38} He commanded the chariot to stand
still, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the
eunuch, and he baptised him.

\bibverse{39} When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn't see him any more, for he went
on his way rejoicing. \bibverse{40} But Philip was found at Azotus.
Passing through, he preached the Good News to all the cities until he
came to Caesarea.

\hypertarget{section-8}{%
\section{9}\label{section-8}}

\bibverse{1} But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest \bibverse{2} and asked
for letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any
who were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem. \bibverse{3} As he travelled, he got close to Damascus, and
suddenly a light from the sky shone around him. \bibverse{4} He fell on
the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, ``Saul, Saul, why do you
persecute me?''

\bibverse{5} He said, ``Who are you, Lord?''

The Lord said, ``I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.\footnote{9:5 TR
  adds ``It's hard for you to kick against the cattle prods.''}
\bibverse{6} But+ 9:6 TR omits ``But'' rise up and enter into the city,
then you will be told what you must do.''

\bibverse{7} The men who travelled with him stood speechless, hearing
the sound, but seeing no one. \bibverse{8} Saul arose from the ground,
and when his eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand
and brought him into Damascus. \bibverse{9} He was without sight for
three days, and neither ate nor drank.

\bibverse{10} Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named
Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, ``Ananias!''

He said, ``Behold, it's me, Lord.''

\bibverse{11} The Lord said to him, ``Arise and go to the street which
is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judah\footnote{9:11 or,
  Judas} for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying,
\bibverse{12} and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in
and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight.''

\bibverse{13} But Ananias answered, ``Lord, I have heard from many about
this man, how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem.
\bibverse{14} Here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all
who call on your name.''

\bibverse{15} But the Lord said to him, ``Go your way, for he is my
chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings, and the
children of Israel. \bibverse{16} For I will show him how many things he
must suffer for my name's sake.''

\bibverse{17} Ananias departed and entered into the house. Laying his
hands on him, he said, ``Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to you on
the road by which you came, has sent me that you may receive your sight
and be filled with the Holy Spirit.'' \bibverse{18} Immediately
something like scales fell from his eyes, and he received his sight. He
arose and was baptised. \bibverse{19} He took food and was strengthened.

Saul stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus.
\bibverse{20} Immediately in the synagogues he proclaimed the Christ,
that he is the Son of God. \bibverse{21} All who heard him were amazed,
and said, ``Isn't this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who
called on this name? And he had come here intending to bring them bound
before the chief priests!''

\bibverse{22} But Saul increased more in strength, and confounded the
Jews who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
\bibverse{23} When many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired together
to kill him, \bibverse{24} but their plot became known to Saul. They
watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him,
\bibverse{25} but his disciples took him by night and let him down
through the wall, lowering him in a basket.

\bibverse{26} When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried to join himself
to the disciples; but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he
was a disciple. \bibverse{27} But Barnabas took him and brought him to
the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord on the way,
and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached
boldly in the name of Jesus. \bibverse{28} He was with them entering
into\footnote{9:28 TR and NU add ``and going out''} Jerusalem,
\bibverse{29} preaching boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.+ 9:29 TR
and NU omit ``Jesus'' and reverse the order of verses 28 \& 29. He spoke
and disputed against the Hellenists,+ 9:29 The Hellenists were Hebrews
who used Greek language and culture. but they were seeking to kill him.
\bibverse{30} When the brothers+ 9:30 The word for ``brothers'' here and
where the context allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers and
sisters'' or ``siblings.'' knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea
and sent him off to Tarsus.

\bibverse{31} So the assemblies throughout all Judea, Galilee, and
Samaria had peace and were built up. They were multiplied, walking in
the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit.

\bibverse{32} As Peter went throughout all those parts, he came down
also to the saints who lived at Lydda. \bibverse{33} There he found a
certain man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years because
he was paralysed. \bibverse{34} Peter said to him, ``Aeneas, Jesus
Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed!'' Immediately he arose.
\bibverse{35} All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him, and they
turned to the Lord.

\bibverse{36} Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha,
which when translated means Dorcas.\footnote{9:36 ``Dorcas'' is Greek
  for ``Gazelle.''} This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy
which she did. \bibverse{37} In those days, she became sick and died.
When they had washed her, they laid her in an upper room. \bibverse{38}
As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there,
sent two men+ 9:38 Reading from NU, TR; MT omits ``two men'' to him,
imploring him not to delay in coming to them. \bibverse{39} Peter got up
and went with them. When he had come, they brought him into the upper
room. All the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the tunics and
other garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them.
\bibverse{40} Peter sent them all out, and knelt down and prayed.
Turning to the body, he said, ``Tabitha, get up!'' She opened her eyes,
and when she saw Peter, she sat up. \bibverse{41} He gave her his hand
and raised her up. Calling the saints and widows, he presented her
alive. \bibverse{42} This became known throughout all Joppa, and many
believed in the Lord. \bibverse{43} He stayed many days in Joppa with a
tanner named Simon.

\hypertarget{section-9}{%
\section{10}\label{section-9}}

\bibverse{1} Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, Cornelius by name,
a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment, \bibverse{2} a
devout man, and one who feared God with all his house, who gave gifts
for the needy generously to the people, and always prayed to God.
\bibverse{3} At about the ninth hour of the day,\footnote{10:3 3:00 p.m.}
he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him and saying to
him, ``Cornelius!''

\bibverse{4} He, fastening his eyes on him and being frightened, said,
``What is it, Lord?''

He said to him, ``Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone up
for a memorial before God. \bibverse{5} Now send men to Joppa, and get
Simon, who is also called Peter. \bibverse{6} He is staying with a
tanner named Simon, whose house is by the seaside.\footnote{10:6 TR adds
  ``This one will tell you what it is necessary for you to do.''}

\bibverse{7} When the angel who spoke to him had departed, Cornelius
called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who
waited on him continually. \bibverse{8} Having explained everything to
them, he sent them to Joppa.

\bibverse{9} Now on the next day as they were on their journey and got
close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon.
\bibverse{10} He became hungry and desired to eat, but while they were
preparing, he fell into a trance. \bibverse{11} He saw heaven opened and
a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet let down by
four corners on the earth, \bibverse{12} in which were all kinds of
four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of
the sky. \bibverse{13} A voice came to him, ``Rise, Peter, kill and
eat!''

\bibverse{14} But Peter said, ``Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten
anything that is common or unclean.''

\bibverse{15} A voice came to him again the second time, ``What God has
cleansed, you must not call unclean.'' \bibverse{16} This was done three
times, and immediately the thing was received up into heaven.

\bibverse{17} Now while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the
vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men who were sent by
Cornelius, having made enquiry for Simon's house, stood before the gate,
\bibverse{18} and called and asked whether Simon, who was also called
Peter, was lodging there. \bibverse{19} While Peter was pondering the
vision, the Spirit said to him, ``Behold, three\footnote{10:19 Reading
  from TR and NU. MT omits ``three''} men seek you. \bibverse{20} But
arise, get down, and go with them, doubting nothing; for I have sent
them.''

\bibverse{21} Peter went down to the men, and said, ``Behold, I am he
whom you seek. Why have you come?''

\bibverse{22} They said, ``Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and
one who fears God, and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was
directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house, and to listen to
what you say.'' \bibverse{23} So he called them in and provided a place
to stay.

On the next day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the
brothers from Joppa accompanied him. \bibverse{24} On the next day they
entered into Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called
together his relatives and his near friends. \bibverse{25} When Peter
entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshipped him.
\bibverse{26} But Peter raised him up, saying, ``Stand up! I myself am
also a man.'' \bibverse{27} As he talked with him, he went in and found
many gathered together. \bibverse{28} He said to them, ``You yourselves
know how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself
or come to one of another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn't
call any man unholy or unclean. \bibverse{29} Therefore I also came
without complaint when I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send
for me?''

\bibverse{30} Cornelius said, ``Four days ago, I was fasting until this
hour; and at the ninth hour,\footnote{10:30 3:00 p.m.} I prayed in my
house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing
\bibverse{31} and said, `Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your gifts
to the needy are remembered in the sight of God. \bibverse{32} Send
therefore to Joppa and summon Simon, who is also called Peter. He is
staying in the house of a tanner named Simon, by the seaside. When he
comes, he will speak to you.' \bibverse{33} Therefore I sent to you at
once, and it was good of you to come. Now therefore we are all here
present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded
you by God.''

\bibverse{34} Peter opened his mouth and said, ``Truly I perceive that
God doesn't show favouritism; \bibverse{35} but in every nation he who
fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. \bibverse{36}
The word which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching good news of
peace by Jesus Christ---he is Lord of all--- \bibverse{37} you
yourselves know what happened, which was proclaimed throughout all
Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached;
\bibverse{38} how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit
and with power, who went about doing good and healing all who were
oppressed by the devil, for God was with him. \bibverse{39} We are
witnesses of everything he did both in the country of the Jews and in
Jerusalem; whom they also\footnote{10:39 TR omits ``also''} killed,
hanging him on a tree. \bibverse{40} God raised him up the third day and
gave him to be revealed, \bibverse{41} not to all the people, but to
witnesses who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with
him after he rose from the dead. \bibverse{42} He commanded us to preach
to the people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as
the Judge of the living and the dead. \bibverse{43} All the prophets
testify about him, that through his name everyone who believes in him
will receive remission of sins.''

\bibverse{44} While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy
Spirit fell on all those who heard the word. \bibverse{45} They of the
circumcision who believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter,
because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles.
\bibverse{46} For they heard them speaking in other languages and
magnifying God.

Then Peter answered, \bibverse{47} ``Can anyone forbid these people from
being baptised with water? They have received the Holy Spirit just like
us.'' \bibverse{48} He commanded them to be baptised in the name of
Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.

\hypertarget{section-10}{%
\section{11}\label{section-10}}

\bibverse{1} Now the apostles and the brothers\footnote{11:1 The word
  for ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be correctly
  translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} who were in
Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
\bibverse{2} When Peter had come up to Jerusalem, those who were of the
circumcision contended with him, \bibverse{3} saying, ``You went in to
uncircumcised men and ate with them!''

\bibverse{4} But Peter began, and explained to them in order, saying,
\bibverse{5} ``I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw
a vision: a certain container descending, like it was a great sheet let
down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as me. \bibverse{6}
When I had looked intently at it, I considered, and saw the four-footed
animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and birds of the
sky. \bibverse{7} I also heard a voice saying to me, `Rise, Peter, kill
and eat!' \bibverse{8} But I said, `Not so, Lord, for nothing unholy or
unclean has ever entered into my mouth.' \bibverse{9} But a voice
answered me the second time out of heaven, `What God has cleansed, don't
you call unclean.' \bibverse{10} This was done three times, and all were
drawn up again into heaven. \bibverse{11} Behold, immediately three men
stood before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to
me. \bibverse{12} The Spirit told me to go with them without
discriminating. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered
into the man's house. \bibverse{13} He told us how he had seen the angel
standing in his house and saying to him, `Send to Joppa and get Simon,
who is called Peter, \bibverse{14} who will speak to you words by which
you will be saved, you and all your house.' \bibverse{15} As I began to
speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.
\bibverse{16} I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, `John
indeed baptised in water, but you will be baptised in the Holy Spirit.'
\bibverse{17} If then God gave to them the same gift as us when we
believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand
God?''

\bibverse{18} When they heard these things, they held their peace and
glorified God, saying, ``Then God has also granted to the Gentiles
repentance to life!''

\bibverse{19} They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression
that arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and
Antioch, speaking the word to no one except to Jews only. \bibverse{20}
But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they
had come to Antioch, spoke to the Hellenists,\footnote{11:20 A Hellenist
  is someone who keeps Greek customs and culture.} preaching the Lord
Jesus. \bibverse{21} The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great
number believed and turned to the Lord. \bibverse{22} The report
concerning them came to the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem.
They sent out Barnabas to go as far as Antioch, \bibverse{23} who, when
he had come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad. He exhorted them
all, that with purpose of heart they should remain near to the Lord.
\bibverse{24} For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of
faith, and many people were added to the Lord.

\bibverse{25} Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul.
\bibverse{26} When he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. For a
whole year they were gathered together with the assembly, and taught
many people. The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.

\bibverse{27} Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to
Antioch. \bibverse{28} One of them named Agabus stood up and indicated
by the Spirit that there should be a great famine all over the world,
which also happened in the days of Claudius. \bibverse{29} As any of the
disciples had plenty, each determined to send relief to the brothers who
lived in Judea; \bibverse{30} which they also did, sending it to the
elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

\hypertarget{section-11}{%
\section{12}\label{section-11}}

\bibverse{1} Now about that time, King Herod stretched out his hands to
oppress some of the assembly. \bibverse{2} He killed James, the brother
of John, with the sword. \bibverse{3} When he saw that it pleased the
Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of
unleavened bread. \bibverse{4} When he had arrested him, he put him in
prison and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard
him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
\bibverse{5} Peter therefore was kept in the prison, but constant prayer
was made by the assembly to God for him. \bibverse{6} The same night
when Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two
soldiers, bound with two chains. Guards in front of the door kept the
prison.

\bibverse{7} And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light
shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side and woke him up, saying,
``Stand up quickly!'' His chains fell off his hands. \bibverse{8} The
angel said to him, ``Get dressed and put on your sandals.'' He did so.
He said to him, ``Put on your cloak and follow me.'' \bibverse{9} And he
went out and followed him. He didn't know that what was being done by
the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision. \bibverse{10} When they
were past the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate
that leads into the city, which opened to them by itself. They went out
and went down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.

\bibverse{11} When Peter had come to himself, he said, ``Now I truly
know that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the
hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish people were expecting.''
\bibverse{12} Thinking about that, he came to the house of Mary, the
mother of John who was called Mark, where many were gathered together
and were praying. \bibverse{13} When Peter knocked at the door of the
gate, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer. \bibverse{14} When she
recognised Peter's voice, she didn't open the gate for joy, but ran in
and reported that Peter was standing in front of the gate.

\bibverse{15} They said to her, ``You are crazy!'' But she insisted that
it was so. They said, ``It is his angel.'' \bibverse{16} But Peter
continued knocking. When they had opened, they saw him and were amazed.
\bibverse{17} But he, beckoning to them with his hand to be silent,
declared to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He
said, ``Tell these things to James and to the brothers.'' Then he
departed and went to another place.

\bibverse{18} Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir amongst
the soldiers about what had become of Peter. \bibverse{19} When Herod
had sought for him and didn't find him, he examined the guards, then
commanded that they should be put to death. He went down from Judea to
Caesarea, and stayed there.

\bibverse{20} Now Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and
Sidon. They came with one accord to him and, having made Blastus, the
king's personal aide, their friend, they asked for peace, because their
country depended on the king's country for food. \bibverse{21} On an
appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on the
throne, and gave a speech to them. \bibverse{22} The people shouted,
``The voice of a god, and not of a man!'' \bibverse{23} Immediately an
angel of the Lord struck him, because he didn't give God the glory. Then
he was eaten by worms and died.

\bibverse{24} But the word of God grew and multiplied. \bibverse{25}
Barnabas and Saul returned to\footnote{12:25 TR reads ``from'' instead
  of ``to''} Jerusalem when they had fulfilled their service, also
taking with them John who was called Mark.

\hypertarget{section-12}{%
\section{13}\label{section-12}}

\bibverse{1} Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some
prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of
Cyrene, Manaen the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
\bibverse{2} As they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said,
``Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to which I have called
them.''

\bibverse{3} Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands
on them, they sent them away. \bibverse{4} So, being sent out by the
Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to
Cyprus. \bibverse{5} When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed God's
word in the Jewish synagogues. They also had John as their attendant.
\bibverse{6} When they had gone through the island to Paphos, they found
a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar Jesus,
\bibverse{7} who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of
understanding. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul, and sought to hear
the word of God. \bibverse{8} But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his
name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn the proconsul
away from the faith. \bibverse{9} But Saul, who is also called Paul,
filled with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him \bibverse{10} and
said, ``You son of the devil, full of all deceit and all cunning, you
enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease to pervert the right ways
of the Lord? \bibverse{11} Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on you,
and you will be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!''

Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him. He went around seeking
someone to lead him by the hand. \bibverse{12} Then the proconsul, when
he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the
Lord.

\bibverse{13} Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos and came to
Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem.
\bibverse{14} But they, passing on from Perga, came to Antioch of
Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down.
\bibverse{15} After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers
of the synagogue sent to them, saying, ``Brothers, if you have any word
of exhortation for the people, speak.''

\bibverse{16} Paul stood up, and gesturing with his hand said, ``Men of
Israel, and you who fear God, listen. \bibverse{17} The God of this
people\footnote{13:17 TR, NU add ``Israel''} chose our fathers, and
exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land of Egypt, and
with an uplifted arm, he led them out of it. \bibverse{18} For a period
of about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness.
\bibverse{19} When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan,
he gave them their land for an inheritance for about four hundred and
fifty years. \bibverse{20} After these things, he gave them judges until
Samuel the prophet. \bibverse{21} Afterward they asked for a king, and
God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin,
for forty years. \bibverse{22} When he had removed him, he raised up
David to be their king, to whom he also testified, `I have found David
the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.'
\bibverse{23} From this man's offspring, God has brought salvation+
13:23 TR, NU read ``a Saviour, Jesus'' instead of ``salvation'' to
Israel according to his promise, \bibverse{24} before his coming, when
John had first preached the baptism of repentance to Israel.+ 13:24 TR,
NU read ``to all the people of Israel'' instead of ``to Israel''
\bibverse{25} As John was fulfilling his course, he said, `What do you
suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, one comes after me, the
sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.'

\bibverse{26} ``Brothers, children of the stock of Abraham, and those
amongst you who fear God, the word of this salvation is sent out to you.
\bibverse{27} For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers,
because they didn't know him, nor the voices of the prophets which are
read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him. \bibverse{28}
Though they found no cause for death, they still asked Pilate to have
him killed. \bibverse{29} When they had fulfilled all things that were
written about him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a
tomb. \bibverse{30} But God raised him from the dead, \bibverse{31} and
he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people. \bibverse{32} We bring
you good news of the promise made to the fathers, \bibverse{33} that God
has fulfilled this to us, their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As
it is also written in the second psalm, `You are my Son. Today I have
become your father.'\footnote{13:33 Psalm 2:7}

\bibverse{34} ``Concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no
more to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: `I will give you the
holy and sure blessings of David.'\footnote{13:34 Isaiah 55:3}
\bibverse{35} Therefore he says also in another psalm, `You will not
allow your Holy One to see decay.'+ 13:35 Psalm 16:10 \bibverse{36} For
David, after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God,
fell asleep, was laid with his fathers, and saw decay. \bibverse{37} But
he whom God raised up saw no decay. \bibverse{38} Be it known to you
therefore, brothers,+ 13:38 The word for ``brothers'' here and where the
context allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers and sisters''
or ``siblings.'' that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of
sins; \bibverse{39} and by him everyone who believes is justified from
all things, from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses.
\bibverse{40} Beware therefore, lest that come on you which is spoken in
the prophets: \bibverse{41} `Behold, you scoffers! Wonder and perish,
for I work a work in your days, a work which you will in no way believe,
if one declares it to you.''' + 13:41 Habakkuk 1:5

\bibverse{42} So when the Jews went out of the synagogue, the Gentiles
begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath.
\bibverse{43} Now when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and of
the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them,
urged them to continue in the grace of God.

\bibverse{44} The next Sabbath, almost the whole city was gathered
together to hear the word of God. \bibverse{45} But when the Jews saw
the multitudes, they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the
things which were spoken by Paul, and blasphemed.

\bibverse{46} Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and said, ``It was
necessary that God's word should be spoken to you first. Since indeed
you thrust it from yourselves, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal
life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles. \bibverse{47} For so has the Lord
commanded us, saying, `I have set you as a light for the Gentiles, that
you should bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.'\,''
\footnote{13:47 Isaiah 49:6}

\bibverse{48} As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and glorified
the word of God. As many as were appointed to eternal life believed.
\bibverse{49} The Lord's word was spread abroad throughout all the
region. \bibverse{50} But the Jews stirred up the devout and prominent
women and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a persecution
against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their borders.
\bibverse{51} But they shook off the dust of their feet against them,
and came to Iconium. \bibverse{52} The disciples were filled with joy
and with the Holy Spirit.

\hypertarget{section-13}{%
\section{14}\label{section-13}}

\bibverse{1} In Iconium, they entered together into the synagogue of the
Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks
believed. \bibverse{2} But the disbelieving\footnote{14:2 or,
  disobedient} Jews stirred up and embittered the souls of the Gentiles
against the brothers. \bibverse{3} Therefore they stayed there a long
time, speaking boldly in the Lord, who testified to the word of his
grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
\bibverse{4} But the multitude of the city was divided. Part sided with
the Jews and part with the apostles. \bibverse{5} When some of both the
Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, made a violent attempt to
mistreat and stone them, \bibverse{6} they became aware of it and fled
to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the surrounding region.
\bibverse{7} There they preached the Good News.

\bibverse{8} At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in his feet, a
cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked. \bibverse{9} He
was listening to Paul speaking, who, fastening eyes on him and seeing
that he had faith to be made whole, \bibverse{10} said with a loud
voice, ``Stand upright on your feet!'' He leapt up and walked.
\bibverse{11} When the multitude saw what Paul had done, they lifted up
their voice, saying in the language of Lycaonia, ``The gods have come
down to us in the likeness of men!'' \bibverse{12} They called Barnabas
``Jupiter'', and Paul ``Mercury'', because he was the chief speaker.
\bibverse{13} The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was in front of their
city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would have made a
sacrifice along with the multitudes.

\bibverse{14} But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it,
they tore their clothes and sprang into the multitude, crying out,
\bibverse{15} ``Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men of
the same nature as you, and bring you good news, that you should turn
from these vain things to the living God, who made the sky, the earth,
the sea, and all that is in them; \bibverse{16} who in the generations
gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways. \bibverse{17}
Yet he didn't leave himself without witness, in that he did good and
gave you\footnote{14:17 TR reads ``us'' instead of ``you''} rains from
the sky and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness.''

\bibverse{18} Even saying these things, they hardly stopped the
multitudes from making a sacrifice to them. \bibverse{19} But some Jews
from Antioch and Iconium came there, and having persuaded the
multitudes, they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing
that he was dead.

\bibverse{20} But as the disciples stood around him, he rose up, and
entered into the city. On the next day he went out with Barnabas to
Derbe.

\bibverse{21} When they had preached the Good News to that city and had
made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
\bibverse{22} strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them
to continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must
enter into God's Kingdom. \bibverse{23} When they had appointed elders
for them in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended
them to the Lord on whom they had believed.

\bibverse{24} They passed through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia.
\bibverse{25} When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to
Attalia. \bibverse{26} From there they sailed to Antioch, from where
they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had
fulfilled. \bibverse{27} When they had arrived and had gathered the
assembly together, they reported all the things that God had done with
them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations.
\bibverse{28} They stayed there with the disciples for a long time.

\hypertarget{section-14}{%
\section{15}\label{section-14}}

\bibverse{1} Some men came down from Judea and taught the
brothers,\footnote{15:1 The word for ``brothers'' here and where the
  context allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers and
  sisters'' or ``siblings.''} ``Unless you are circumcised after the
custom of Moses, you can't be saved.'' \bibverse{2} Therefore when Paul
and Barnabas had no small discord and discussion with them, they
appointed Paul, Barnabas, and some others of them to go up to Jerusalem
to the apostles and elders about this question. \bibverse{3} They, being
sent on their way by the assembly, passed through both Phoenicia and
Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles. They caused great joy
to all the brothers. \bibverse{4} When they had come to Jerusalem, they
were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders, and they
reported everything that God had done with them.

\bibverse{5} But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up,
saying, ``It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to
keep the law of Moses.''

\bibverse{6} The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see
about this matter. \bibverse{7} When there had been much discussion,
Peter rose up and said to them, ``Brothers, you know that a good while
ago God made a choice amongst you that by my mouth the nations should
hear the word of the Good News and believe. \bibverse{8} God, who knows
the heart, testified about them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like
he did to us. \bibverse{9} He made no distinction between us and them,
cleansing their hearts by faith. \bibverse{10} Now therefore why do you
tempt God, that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? \bibverse{11} But we
believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord
Jesus,\footnote{15:11 TR adds ``Christ''} just as they are.''

\bibverse{12} All the multitude kept silence, and they listened to
Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done amongst
the nations through them. \bibverse{13} After they were silent, James
answered, ``Brothers, listen to me. \bibverse{14} Simeon has reported
how God first visited the nations to take out of them a people for his
name. \bibverse{15} This agrees with the words of the prophets. As it is
written, \bibverse{16} `After these things I will return. I will again
build the tabernacle of David, which has fallen. I will again build its
ruins. I will set it up \bibverse{17} that the rest of men may seek
after the Lord; all the Gentiles who are called by my name, says the
Lord, who does all these things.'\footnote{15:17 Amos 9:11-12}

\bibverse{18} ``All of God's works are known to him from eternity.
\bibverse{19} Therefore my judgement is that we don't trouble those from
amongst the Gentiles who turn to God, \bibverse{20} but that we write to
them that they abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual
immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood. \bibverse{21} For
Moses from generations of old has in every city those who preach him,
being read in the synagogues every Sabbath.''

\bibverse{22} Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with
the whole assembly, to choose men out of their company, and send them to
Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief
men amongst the brothers.\footnote{15:22 The word for ``brothers'' here
  and where the context allows may also be correctly translated
  ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} \bibverse{23} They wrote
these things by their hand:

``The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are of
the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings. \bibverse{24}
Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you
with words, unsettling your souls, saying, `You must be circumcised and
keep the law,' to whom we gave no commandment; \bibverse{25} it seemed
good to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and send them
to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, \bibverse{26} men who have
risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. \bibverse{27}
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves will also tell
you the same things by word of mouth. \bibverse{28} For it seemed good
to the Holy Spirit, and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than
these necessary things: \bibverse{29} that you abstain from things
sacrificed to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from sexual
immorality, from which if you keep yourselves, it will be well with you.
Farewell.''

\bibverse{30} So, when they were sent off, they came to Antioch. Having
gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.
\bibverse{31} When they had read it, they rejoiced over the
encouragement. \bibverse{32} Judas and Silas, also being prophets
themselves, encouraged the brothers with many words and strengthened
them. \bibverse{33} After they had spent some time there, they were
dismissed in peace from the brothers to the apostles. \bibverse{34}
\footnote{15:34 Some manuscripts add: But it seemed good to Silas to
  stay there.} \bibverse{35} But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch,
teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.

\bibverse{36} After some days Paul said to Barnabas, ``Let's return now
and visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of
the Lord, to see how they are doing.'' \bibverse{37} Barnabas planned to
take John, who was called Mark, with them also. \bibverse{38} But Paul
didn't think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who had
withdrawn from them in Pamphylia, and didn't go with them to do the
work. \bibverse{39} Then the contention grew so sharp that they
separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away
to Cyprus, \bibverse{40} but Paul chose Silas and went out, being
commended by the brothers to the grace of God. \bibverse{41} He went
through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the assemblies.

\hypertarget{section-15}{%
\section{16}\label{section-15}}

\bibverse{1} He came to Derbe and Lystra; and behold, a certain disciple
was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who believed, but his
father was a Greek. \bibverse{2} The brothers who were at Lystra and
Iconium gave a good testimony about him. \bibverse{3} Paul wanted to
have him go out with him, and he took and circumcised him because of the
Jews who were in those parts, for they all knew that his father was a
Greek. \bibverse{4} As they went on their way through the cities, they
delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the
apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem. \bibverse{5} So the
assemblies were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number
daily.

\bibverse{6} When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and
Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in
Asia. \bibverse{7} When they had come opposite Mysia, they tried to go
into Bithynia, but the Spirit didn't allow them. \bibverse{8} Passing by
Mysia, they came down to Troas. \bibverse{9} A vision appeared to Paul
in the night. There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him and
saying, ``Come over into Macedonia and help us.'' \bibverse{10} When he
had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia,
concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the Good News to them.
\bibverse{11} Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a straight
course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis; \bibverse{12}
and from there to Philippi, which is a city of Macedonia, the foremost
of the district, a Roman colony. We were staying some days in this city.

\bibverse{13} On the Sabbath day we went outside of the city by a
riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat
down and spoke to the women who had come together. \bibverse{14} A
certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira,
one who worshipped God, heard us. The Lord opened her heart to listen to
the things which were spoken by Paul. \bibverse{15} When she and her
household were baptised, she begged us, saying, ``If you have judged me
to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and stay.'' So she
persuaded us.

\bibverse{16} As we were going to prayer, a certain girl having a spirit
of divination met us, who brought her masters much gain by fortune
telling. \bibverse{17} Following Paul and us, she cried out, ``These men
are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way of
salvation!'' \bibverse{18} She was doing this for many days.

But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, ``I
command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!'' It came
out that very hour. \bibverse{19} But when her masters saw that the hope
of their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into
the marketplace before the rulers. \bibverse{20} When they had brought
them to the magistrates, they said, ``These men, being Jews, are
agitating our city \bibverse{21} and advocate customs which it is not
lawful for us to accept or to observe, being Romans.''

\bibverse{22} The multitude rose up together against them and the
magistrates tore their clothes from them, then commanded them to be
beaten with rods. \bibverse{23} When they had laid many stripes on them,
they threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely.
\bibverse{24} Having received such a command, he threw them into the
inner prison and secured their feet in the stocks.

\bibverse{25} But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing
hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them. \bibverse{26}
Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the
prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and
everyone's bonds were loosened. \bibverse{27} The jailer, being roused
out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was
about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
\bibverse{28} But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, ``Don't harm
yourself, for we are all here!''

\bibverse{29} He called for lights, sprang in, fell down trembling
before Paul and Silas, \bibverse{30} brought them out, and said, ``Sirs,
what must I do to be saved?''

\bibverse{31} They said, ``Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you
will be saved, you and your household.'' \bibverse{32} They spoke the
word of the Lord to him, and to all who were in his house.

\bibverse{33} He took them the same hour of the night and washed their
stripes, and was immediately baptised, he and all his household.
\bibverse{34} He brought them up into his house and set food before
them, and rejoiced greatly with all his household, having believed in
God.

\bibverse{35} But when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants,
saying, ``Let those men go.''

\bibverse{36} The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, ``The
magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore come out and go in
peace.''

\bibverse{37} But Paul said to them, ``They have beaten us publicly
without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast us into prison! Do
they now release us secretly? No, most certainly, but let them come
themselves and bring us out!''

\bibverse{38} The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and
they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans, \bibverse{39}
and they came and begged them. When they had brought them out, they
asked them to depart from the city. \bibverse{40} They went out of the
prison and entered into Lydia's house. When they had seen the brothers,
they encouraged them, then departed.

\hypertarget{section-16}{%
\section{17}\label{section-16}}

\bibverse{1} Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia,
they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
\bibverse{2} Paul, as was his custom, went in to them; and for three
Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures, \bibverse{3}
explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer and rise
again from the dead, and saying, ``This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you,
is the Christ.''

\bibverse{4} Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas: of
the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of the chief women.
\bibverse{5} But the unpersuaded Jews took along\footnote{17:5 TR reads
  ``And the Jews who were unpersuaded, becoming envious and taking
  along'' instead of ``But the unpersuaded Jews took along''} some
wicked men from the marketplace and gathering a crowd, set the city in
an uproar. Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out
to the people. \bibverse{6} When they didn't find them, they dragged
Jason and certain brothers+ 17:6 The word for ``brothers'' here and
where the context allows may be also correctly translated ``brothers and
sisters'' or ``siblings.'' before the rulers of the city, crying,
``These who have turned the world upside down have come here also,
\bibverse{7} whom Jason has received. These all act contrary to the
decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus!''
\bibverse{8} The multitude and the rulers of the city were troubled when
they heard these things. \bibverse{9} When they had taken security from
Jason and the rest, they let them go.

\bibverse{10} The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night
to Beroea. When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue.

\bibverse{11} Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in
that they received the word with all readiness of mind, examining the
Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so. \bibverse{12} Many
of them therefore believed; also of the prominent Greek women, and not a
few men. \bibverse{13} But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge
that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also, they came
there likewise, agitating the multitudes. \bibverse{14} Then the
brothers immediately sent out Paul to go as far as to the sea, and Silas
and Timothy still stayed there. \bibverse{15} But those who escorted
Paul brought him as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and
Timothy that they should come to him very quickly, they departed.

\bibverse{16} Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was
provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols. \bibverse{17} So
he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and
in the marketplace every day with those who met him. \bibverse{18} Some
of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also\footnote{17:18 TR omits
  ``also''} were conversing with him. Some said, ``What does this
babbler want to say?''

Others said, ``He seems to be advocating foreign deities,'' because he
preached Jesus and the resurrection.

\bibverse{19} They took hold of him and brought him to the Areopagus,
saying, ``May we know what this new teaching is, which you are speaking
about? \bibverse{20} For you bring certain strange things to our ears.
We want to know therefore what these things mean.'' \bibverse{21} Now
all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time in
nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.

\bibverse{22} Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus and said, ``You
men of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things.
\bibverse{23} For as I passed along and observed the objects of your
worship, I also found an altar with this inscription: `TO AN UNKNOWN
GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, I announce to you.
\bibverse{24} The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being
Lord of heaven and earth, doesn't dwell in temples made with hands.
\bibverse{25} He isn't served by men's hands, as though he needed
anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and breath and all things.
\bibverse{26} He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all
the surface of the earth, having determined appointed seasons and the
boundaries of their dwellings, \bibverse{27} that they should seek the
Lord, if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is
not far from each one of us. \bibverse{28} `For in him we live, move,
and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, `For we are
also his offspring.' \bibverse{29} Being then the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or
stone, engraved by art and design of man. \bibverse{30} The times of
ignorance therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all people
everywhere should repent, \bibverse{31} because he has appointed a day
in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has
ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead.''

\bibverse{32} Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked; but others said, ``We want to hear you again concerning this.''

\bibverse{33} Thus Paul went out from amongst them. \bibverse{34} But
certain men joined with him and believed, including Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

\hypertarget{section-17}{%
\section{18}\label{section-17}}

\bibverse{1} After these things Paul departed from Athens and came to
Corinth. \bibverse{2} He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of
Pontus by race, who had recently come from Italy with his wife
Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from
Rome. He came to them, \bibverse{3} and because he practised the same
trade, he lived with them and worked, for by trade they were tent
makers. \bibverse{4} He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath and
persuaded Jews and Greeks.

\bibverse{5} When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was
compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the
Christ. \bibverse{6} When they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out
his clothing and said to them, ``Your blood be on your own heads! I am
clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!''

\bibverse{7} He departed there and went into the house of a certain man
named Justus, one who worshipped God, whose house was next door to the
synagogue. \bibverse{8} Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in
the Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, when they heard,
believed and were baptised. \bibverse{9} The Lord said to Paul in the
night by a vision, ``Don't be afraid, but speak and don't be silent;
\bibverse{10} for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you,
for I have many people in this city.''

\bibverse{11} He lived there a year and six months, teaching the word of
God amongst them. \bibverse{12} But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia,
the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the
judgement seat, \bibverse{13} saying, ``This man persuades men to
worship God contrary to the law.''

\bibverse{14} But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to
the Jews, ``If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime, you
Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you; \bibverse{15}
but if they are questions about words and names and your own law, look
to it yourselves. For I don't want to be a judge of these matters.''
\bibverse{16} So he drove them from the judgement seat.

\bibverse{17} Then all the Greeks seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the
synagogue, and beat him before the judgement seat. Gallio didn't care
about any of these things.

\bibverse{18} Paul, having stayed after this many more days, took his
leave of the brothers,\footnote{18:18 The word for ``brothers'' here and
  where the context allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers
  and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} and sailed from there for Syria,
together with Priscilla and Aquila. He shaved his head in Cenchreae, for
he had a vow. \bibverse{19} He came to Ephesus, and he left them there;
but he himself entered into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
\bibverse{20} When they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he
declined; \bibverse{21} but taking his leave of them, he said, ``I must
by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return
again to you if God wills.'' Then he set sail from Ephesus.

\bibverse{22} When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the
assembly, and went down to Antioch. \bibverse{23} Having spent some time
there, he departed and went through the region of Galatia and Phrygia,
in order, establishing all the disciples. \bibverse{24} Now a certain
Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to
Ephesus. He was mighty in the Scriptures. \bibverse{25} This man had
been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he
spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, although he
knew only the baptism of John. \bibverse{26} He began to speak boldly in
the synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him
aside, and explained to him the way of God more accurately.

\bibverse{27} When he had determined to pass over into Achaia, the
brothers encouraged him; and wrote to the disciples to receive him. When
he had come, he greatly helped those who had believed through grace;
\bibverse{28} for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by
the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.

\hypertarget{section-18}{%
\section{19}\label{section-18}}

\bibverse{1} While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through
the upper country, came to Ephesus and found certain disciples.
\bibverse{2} He said to them, ``Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you
believed?''

They said to him, ``No, we haven't even heard that there is a Holy
Spirit.''

\bibverse{3} He said, ``Into what then were you baptised?''

They said, ``Into John's baptism.''

\bibverse{4} Paul said, ``John indeed baptised with the baptism of
repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one who
would come after him, that is, in Jesus.''

\bibverse{5} When they heard this, they were baptised in the name of the
Lord Jesus. \bibverse{6} When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy
Spirit came on them and they spoke with other languages and prophesied.
\bibverse{7} They were about twelve men in all.

\bibverse{8} He entered into the synagogue and spoke boldly for a period
of three months, reasoning and persuading about the things concerning
God's Kingdom.

\bibverse{9} But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil
of the Way before the multitude, he departed from them and separated the
disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus. \bibverse{10} This
continued for two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the
word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

\bibverse{11} God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul,
\bibverse{12} so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away
from his body to the sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the
evil spirits went out. \bibverse{13} But some of the itinerant Jews,
exorcists, took on themselves to invoke over those who had the evil
spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, ``We adjure you by Jesus
whom Paul preaches.'' \bibverse{14} There were seven sons of one Sceva,
a Jewish chief priest, who did this.

\bibverse{15} The evil spirit answered, ``Jesus I know, and Paul I know,
but who are you?'' \bibverse{16} The man in whom the evil spirit was
leapt on them, overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that
they fled out of that house naked and wounded. \bibverse{17} This became
known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on
them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. \bibverse{18}
Many also of those who had believed came, confessing and declaring their
deeds. \bibverse{19} Many of those who practised magical arts brought
their books together and burnt them in the sight of all. They counted
their price, and found it to be fifty thousand pieces of
silver.\footnote{19:19 The 50,000 pieces of silver here probably
  referred to 50,000 drachmas. If so, the value of the burnt books was
  equivalent to about 160 man-years of wages for agricultural labourers}
\bibverse{20} So the word of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty.

\bibverse{21} Now after these things had ended, Paul determined in the
Spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to
Jerusalem, saying, ``After I have been there, I must also see Rome.''

\bibverse{22} Having sent into Macedonia two of those who served him,
Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.
\bibverse{23} About that time there arose no small disturbance
concerning the Way. \bibverse{24} For a certain man named Demetrius, a
silversmith who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little
business to the craftsmen, \bibverse{25} whom he gathered together with
the workmen of like occupation, and said, ``Sirs, you know that by this
business we have our wealth. \bibverse{26} You see and hear that not at
Ephesus alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded
and turned away many people, saying that they are no gods that are made
with hands. \bibverse{27} Not only is there danger that this our trade
come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess
Artemis will be counted as nothing and her majesty destroyed, whom all
Asia and the world worships.''

\bibverse{28} When they heard this they were filled with anger, and
cried out, saying, ``Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!'' \bibverse{29}
The whole city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one
accord into the theatre, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of
Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel. \bibverse{30} When Paul wanted
to enter in to the people, the disciples didn't allow him. \bibverse{31}
Certain also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent to him and begged
him not to venture into the theatre. \bibverse{32} Some therefore cried
one thing, and some another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of
them didn't know why they had come together. \bibverse{33} They brought
Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander
beckoned with his hand, and would have made a defence to the people.
\bibverse{34} But when they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one
voice for a time of about two hours cried out, ``Great is Artemis of the
Ephesians!''

\bibverse{35} When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said,
``You men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn't know that the city
of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis, and of
the image which fell down from Zeus? \bibverse{36} Seeing then that
these things can't be denied, you ought to be quiet and to do nothing
rash. \bibverse{37} For you have brought these men here, who are neither
robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess. \bibverse{38} If
therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a matter
against anyone, the courts are open and there are proconsuls. Let them
press charges against one another. \bibverse{39} But if you seek
anything about other matters, it will be settled in the regular
assembly. \bibverse{40} For indeed we are in danger of being accused
concerning today's riot, there being no cause. Concerning it, we
wouldn't be able to give an account of this commotion.'' \bibverse{41}
When he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.

\hypertarget{section-19}{%
\section{20}\label{section-19}}

\bibverse{1} After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples,
took leave of them, and departed to go into Macedonia. \bibverse{2} When
he had gone through those parts and had encouraged them with many words,
he came into Greece. \bibverse{3} When he had spent three months there,
and a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for
Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia. \bibverse{4} These
accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea, Aristarchus and
Secundus of the Thessalonians, Gaius of Derbe, Timothy, and Tychicus and
Trophimus of Asia. \bibverse{5} But these had gone ahead, and were
waiting for us at Troas. \bibverse{6} We sailed away from Philippi after
the days of Unleavened Bread, and came to them at Troas in five days,
where we stayed seven days.

\bibverse{7} On the first day of the week, when the disciples were
gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to
depart on the next day; and continued his speech until midnight.
\bibverse{8} There were many lights in the upper room where
we\footnote{20:8 TR reads ``they'' instead of ``we''} were gathered
together. \bibverse{9} A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the
window, weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer, being
weighed down by his sleep, he fell down from the third floor and was
taken up dead. \bibverse{10} Paul went down and fell upon him, and
embracing him said, ``Don't be troubled, for his life is in him.''

\bibverse{11} When he had gone up, had broken bread and eaten, and had
talked with them a long while, even until break of day, he departed.
\bibverse{12} They brought the boy in alive, and were greatly comforted.

\bibverse{13} But we, going ahead to the ship, set sail for Assos,
intending to take Paul aboard there; for he had so arranged, intending
himself to go by land. \bibverse{14} When he met us at Assos, we took
him aboard and came to Mitylene. \bibverse{15} Sailing from there, we
came the following day opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos
and stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus.
\bibverse{16} For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he
might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were
possible for him, to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.

\bibverse{17} From Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called to himself the
elders of the assembly. \bibverse{18} When they had come to him, he said
to them, ``You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in
Asia, how I was with you all the time, \bibverse{19} serving the Lord
with all humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me
by the plots of the Jews; \bibverse{20} how I didn't shrink from
declaring to you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and
from house to house, \bibverse{21} testifying both to Jews and to Greeks
repentance towards God and faith towards our Lord Jesus.\footnote{20:21
  TR adds ``Christ''} \bibverse{22} Now, behold, I go bound by the
Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there;
\bibverse{23} except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city,
saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me. \bibverse{24} But these
things don't count; nor do I hold my life dear to myself, so that I may
finish my race with joy, and the ministry which I received from the Lord
Jesus, to fully testify to the Good News of the grace of God.

\bibverse{25} ``Now, behold, I know that you all, amongst whom I went
about preaching God's Kingdom, will see my face no more. \bibverse{26}
Therefore I testify to you today that I am clean from the blood of all
men, \bibverse{27} for I didn't shrink from declaring to you the whole
counsel of God. \bibverse{28} Take heed, therefore, to yourselves and to
all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to
shepherd the assembly of the Lord and\footnote{20:28 TR, NU omit ``the
  Lord and''} God which he purchased with his own blood. \bibverse{29}
For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter in amongst
you, not sparing the flock. \bibverse{30} Men will arise from amongst
your own selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples
after them. \bibverse{31} Therefore watch, remembering that for a period
of three years I didn't cease to admonish everyone night and day with
tears. \bibverse{32} Now, brothers,+ 20:32 The word for ``brothers''
here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated
``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.'' I entrust you to God and to
the word of his grace, which is able to build up and to give you the
inheritance amongst all those who are sanctified. \bibverse{33} I
coveted no one's silver, gold, or clothing. \bibverse{34} You yourselves
know that these hands served my necessities, and those who were with me.
\bibverse{35} In all things I gave you an example, that so labouring you
ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus,
that he himself said, `It is more blessed to give than to receive.'''

\bibverse{36} When he had spoken these things, he knelt down and prayed
with them all. \bibverse{37} They all wept freely, and fell on Paul's
neck and kissed him, \bibverse{38} sorrowing most of all because of the
word which he had spoken, that they should see his face no more. Then
they accompanied him to the ship.

\hypertarget{section-20}{%
\section{21}\label{section-20}}

\bibverse{1} When we had departed from them and had set sail, we came
with a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from
there to Patara. \bibverse{2} Having found a ship crossing over to
Phoenicia, we went aboard and set sail. \bibverse{3} When we had come in
sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria and
landed at Tyre, for the ship was there to unload her cargo. \bibverse{4}
Having found disciples, we stayed there seven days. These said to Paul
through the Spirit that he should not go up to Jerusalem. \bibverse{5}
When those days were over, we departed and went on our journey. They
all, with wives and children, brought us on our way until we were out of
the city. Kneeling down on the beach, we prayed. \bibverse{6} After
saying goodbye to each other, we went on board the ship, and they
returned home again.

\bibverse{7} When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at
Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers and stayed with them one day.
\bibverse{8} On the next day, we who were Paul's companions departed and
came to Caesarea.

We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the
seven, and stayed with him. \bibverse{9} Now this man had four virgin
daughters who prophesied. \bibverse{10} As we stayed there some days, a
certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea. \bibverse{11} Coming
to us and taking Paul's belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said,
``The Holy Spirit says: `So the Jews at Jerusalem will bind the man who
owns this belt, and will deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles.'\,''

\bibverse{12} When we heard these things, both we and the people of that
place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem. \bibverse{13} Then Paul
answered, ``What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am
ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of
the Lord Jesus.''

\bibverse{14} When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, ``The
Lord's will be done.''

\bibverse{15} After these days we took up our baggage and went up to
Jerusalem. \bibverse{16} Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went
with us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we
would stay.

\bibverse{17} When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us
gladly. \bibverse{18} The day following, Paul went in with us to James;
and all the elders were present. \bibverse{19} When he had greeted them,
he reported one by one the things which God had worked amongst the
Gentiles through his ministry. \bibverse{20} They, when they heard it,
glorified God. They said to him, ``You see, brother, how many thousands
there are amongst the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all
zealous for the law. \bibverse{21} They have been informed about you,
that you teach all the Jews who are amongst the Gentiles to forsake
Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children and not to walk
after the customs. \bibverse{22} What then? The assembly must certainly
meet, for they will hear that you have come. \bibverse{23} Therefore do
what we tell you. We have four men who have taken a vow. \bibverse{24}
Take them and purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses for
them, that they may shave their heads. Then all will know that there is
no truth in the things that they have been informed about you, but that
you yourself also walk keeping the law. \bibverse{25} But concerning the
Gentiles who believe, we have written our decision that they should
observe no such thing, except that they should keep themselves from food
offered to idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual
immorality.''

\bibverse{26} Then Paul took the men, and the next day purified himself
and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfilment of the days
of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of them.
\bibverse{27} When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from
Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the multitude and
laid hands on him, \bibverse{28} crying out, ``Men of Israel, help! This
is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the
law, and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple
and has defiled this holy place!'' \bibverse{29} For they had seen
Trophimus the Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that
Paul had brought him into the temple.

\bibverse{30} All the city was moved and the people ran together. They
seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. Immediately the doors
were shut. \bibverse{31} As they were trying to kill him, news came up
to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an
uproar. \bibverse{32} Immediately he took soldiers and centurions and
ran down to them. They, when they saw the chief captain and the
soldiers, stopped beating Paul. \bibverse{33} Then the commanding
officer came near, arrested him, commanded him to be bound with two
chains, and enquired who he was and what he had done. \bibverse{34} Some
shouted one thing and some another, amongst the crowd. When he couldn't
find out the truth because of the noise, he commanded him to be brought
into the barracks.

\bibverse{35} When he came to the stairs, he was carried by the soldiers
because of the violence of the crowd; \bibverse{36} for the multitude of
the people followed after, crying out, ``Away with him!'' \bibverse{37}
As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the
commanding officer, ``May I speak to you?''

He said, ``Do you know Greek? \bibverse{38} Aren't you then the Egyptian
who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the
wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?''

\bibverse{39} But Paul said, ``I am a Jew from Tarsus in Cilicia, a
citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to speak to the
people.''

\bibverse{40} When he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the
stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there was a great
silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,

\hypertarget{section-21}{%
\section{22}\label{section-21}}

\bibverse{1} ``Brothers and fathers, listen to the defence which I now
make to you.''

\bibverse{2} When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew
language, they were even more quiet.

He said, \bibverse{3} ``I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia,
but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed
according to the strict tradition of the law of our fathers, being
zealous for God, even as you all are today. \bibverse{4} I persecuted
this Way to the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and
women, \bibverse{5} as also the high priest and all the council of the
elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the brothers, and
travelled to Damascus to bring them also who were there to Jerusalem in
bonds to be punished.

\bibverse{6} ``As I made my journey and came close to Damascus, about
noon suddenly a great light shone around me from the sky. \bibverse{7} I
fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, `Saul, Saul, why are
you persecuting me?' \bibverse{8} I answered, `Who are you, Lord?' He
said to me, `I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.'

\bibverse{9} ``Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were
afraid, but they didn't understand the voice of him who spoke to me.
\bibverse{10} I said, `What shall I do, Lord?' The Lord said to me,
`Arise, and go into Damascus. There you will be told about all things
which are appointed for you to do.' \bibverse{11} When I couldn't see
for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were
with me, I came into Damascus.

\bibverse{12} ``One Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well
reported of by all the Jews who lived in Damascus, \bibverse{13} came to
me, and standing by me said to me, `Brother Saul, receive your sight!'
In that very hour I looked up at him. \bibverse{14} He said, `The God of
our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous
One, and to hear a voice from his mouth. \bibverse{15} For you will be a
witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard.
\bibverse{16} Now why do you wait? Arise, be baptised, and wash away
your sins, calling on the name of the Lord.'

\bibverse{17} ``When I had returned to Jerusalem and while I prayed in
the temple, I fell into a trance \bibverse{18} and saw him saying to me,
`Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receive
testimony concerning me from you.' \bibverse{19} I said, `Lord, they
themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who
believed in you. \bibverse{20} When the blood of Stephen, your witness,
was shed, I also was standing by, consenting to his death, and guarding
the cloaks of those who killed him.'

\bibverse{21} ``He said to me, `Depart, for I will send you out far from
here to the Gentiles.'\,''

\bibverse{22} They listened to him until he said that; then they lifted
up their voice and said, ``Rid the earth of this fellow, for he isn't
fit to live!''

\bibverse{23} As they cried out, threw off their cloaks, and threw dust
into the air, \bibverse{24} the commanding officer commanded him to be
brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging,
that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that.
\bibverse{25} When they had tied him up with thongs, Paul asked the
centurion who stood by, ``Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a
Roman, and not found guilty?''

\bibverse{26} When the centurion heard it, he went to the commanding
officer and told him, ``Watch what you are about to do, for this man is
a Roman!''

\bibverse{27} The commanding officer came and asked him, ``Tell me, are
you a Roman?''

He said, ``Yes.''

\bibverse{28} The commanding officer answered, ``I bought my citizenship
for a great price.''

Paul said, ``But I was born a Roman.''

\bibverse{29} Immediately those who were about to examine him departed
from him, and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realised
that he was a Roman, because he had bound him. \bibverse{30} But on the
next day, desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the
Jews, he freed him from the bonds and commanded the chief priests and
all the council to come together, and brought Paul down and set him
before them.

\hypertarget{section-22}{%
\section{23}\label{section-22}}

\bibverse{1} Paul, looking steadfastly at the council, said, ``Brothers,
I have lived before God in all good conscience until today.''

\bibverse{2} The high priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him
to strike him on the mouth.

\bibverse{3} Then Paul said to him, ``God will strike you, you
whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and
command me to be struck contrary to the law?''

\bibverse{4} Those who stood by said, ``Do you malign God's high
priest?''

\bibverse{5} Paul said, ``I didn't know, brothers, that he was high
priest. For it is written, `You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your
people.'\,''\footnote{23:5 Exodus 22:28}

\bibverse{6} But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees
and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, ``Men and
brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am being judged!''

\bibverse{7} When he had said this, an argument arose between the
Pharisees and Sadducees, and the crowd was divided. \bibverse{8} For the
Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but
the Pharisees confess all of these. \bibverse{9} A great clamour arose,
and some of the scribes of the Pharisees' part stood up, and contended,
saying, ``We find no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has
spoken to him, let's not fight against God!''

\bibverse{10} When a great argument arose, the commanding officer,
fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, commanded the
soldiers to go down and take him by force from amongst them and bring
him into the barracks.

\bibverse{11} The following night, the Lord stood by him and said,
``Cheer up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so
you must testify also at Rome.''

\bibverse{12} When it was day, some of the Jews banded together and
bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor
drink until they had killed Paul. \bibverse{13} There were more than
forty people who had made this conspiracy. \bibverse{14} They came to
the chief priests and the elders, and said, ``We have bound ourselves
under a great curse to taste nothing until we have killed Paul.
\bibverse{15} Now therefore, you with the council inform the commanding
officer that he should bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you
were going to judge his case more exactly. We are ready to kill him
before he comes near.''

\bibverse{16} But Paul's sister's son heard they were lying in wait, and
he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul. \bibverse{17} Paul
summoned one of the centurions and said, ``Bring this young man to the
commanding officer, for he has something to tell him.''

\bibverse{18} So he took him and brought him to the commanding officer
and said, ``Paul, the prisoner, summoned me and asked me to bring this
young man to you. He has something to tell you.''

\bibverse{19} The commanding officer took him by the hand, and going
aside, asked him privately, ``What is it that you have to tell me?''

\bibverse{20} He said, ``The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul
down to the council tomorrow, as though intending to enquire somewhat
more accurately concerning him. \bibverse{21} Therefore don't yield to
them, for more than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound
themselves under a curse to neither eat nor drink until they have killed
him. Now they are ready, looking for the promise from you.''

\bibverse{22} So the commanding officer let the young man go, charging
him, ``Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me.''

\bibverse{23} He called to himself two of the centurions, and said,
``Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea, with seventy
horsemen and two hundred men armed with spears, at the third hour of the
night.''\footnote{23:23 about 9:00 p.m.} \bibverse{24} He asked them to
provide mounts, that they might set Paul on one, and bring him safely to
Felix the governor. \bibverse{25} He wrote a letter like this:

\bibverse{26} ``Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix:
Greetings.

\bibverse{27} ``This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be
killed by them when I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having
learnt that he was a Roman. \bibverse{28} Desiring to know the cause why
they accused him, I brought him down to their council. \bibverse{29} I
found him to be accused about questions of their law, but not to be
charged with anything worthy of death or of imprisonment. \bibverse{30}
When I was told that the Jews lay in wait for the man, I sent him to you
immediately, charging his accusers also to bring their accusations
against him before you. Farewell.''

\bibverse{31} So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and
brought him by night to Antipatris. \bibverse{32} But on the next day
they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks.
\bibverse{33} When they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the
governor, they also presented Paul to him. \bibverse{34} When the
governor had read it, he asked what province he was from. When he
understood that he was from Cilicia, he said, \bibverse{35} ``I will
hear you fully when your accusers also arrive.'' He commanded that he be
kept in Herod's palace.

\hypertarget{section-23}{%
\section{24}\label{section-23}}

\bibverse{1} After five days, the high priest, Ananias, came down with
certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus. They informed the governor
against Paul. \bibverse{2} When he was called, Tertullus began to accuse
him, saying, ``Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that
prosperity is coming to this nation by your foresight, \bibverse{3} we
accept it in all ways and in all places, most excellent Felix, with all
thankfulness. \bibverse{4} But that I don't delay you, I entreat you to
bear with us and hear a few words. \bibverse{5} For we have found this
man to be a plague, an instigator of insurrections amongst all the Jews
throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
\bibverse{6} He even tried to profane the temple, and we arrested
him.\footnote{24:6 TR adds ``We wanted to judge him according to our
  law,''} \bibverse{7} + 24:7 TR adds ``but the commanding officer,
Lysias, came by and with great violence took him out of our hands,''
\bibverse{8} + 24:8 TR adds ``commanding his accusers to come to
you.''By examining him yourself you may ascertain all these things of
which we accuse him.''

\bibverse{9} The Jews also joined in the attack, affirming that these
things were so.

\bibverse{10} When the governor had beckoned to him to speak, Paul
answered, ``Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for
many years, I cheerfully make my defence, \bibverse{11} seeing that you
can verify that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to
worship at Jerusalem. \bibverse{12} In the temple they didn't find me
disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues
or in the city. \bibverse{13} Nor can they prove to you the things of
which they now accuse me. \bibverse{14} But this I confess to you, that
according to the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our
fathers, believing all things which are according to the law, and which
are written in the prophets; \bibverse{15} having hope towards God,
which these also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection
of the dead, both of the just and unjust. \bibverse{16} In this I also
practise always having a conscience void of offence towards God and men.
\bibverse{17} Now after some years, I came to bring gifts for the needy
to my nation, and offerings; \bibverse{18} amid which certain Jews from
Asia found me purified in the temple, not with a mob, nor with turmoil.
\bibverse{19} They ought to have been here before you and to make
accusation if they had anything against me. \bibverse{20} Or else let
these men themselves say what injustice they found in me when I stood
before the council, \bibverse{21} unless it is for this one thing that I
cried standing amongst them, `Concerning the resurrection of the dead I
am being judged before you today!'\,''

\bibverse{22} But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way,
deferred them, saying, ``When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes
down, I will decide your case.'' \bibverse{23} He ordered the centurion
that Paul should be kept in custody and should have some privileges, and
not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him.

\bibverse{24} After some days, Felix came with Drusilla his wife, who
was a Jewess, and sent for Paul and heard him concerning the faith in
Christ Jesus. \bibverse{25} As he reasoned about righteousness,
self-control, and the judgement to come, Felix was terrified, and
answered, ``Go your way for this time, and when it is convenient for me,
I will summon you.'' \bibverse{26} Meanwhile, he also hoped that money
would be given to him by Paul, that he might release him. Therefore also
he sent for him more often and talked with him.

\bibverse{27} But when two years were fulfilled, Felix was succeeded by
Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favour with the Jews, Felix left
Paul in bonds.

\hypertarget{section-24}{%
\section{25}\label{section-24}}

\bibverse{1} Festus therefore, having come into the province, after
three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. \bibverse{2} Then the
high priest and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul,
and they begged him, \bibverse{3} asking a favour against him, that he
would summon him to Jerusalem, plotting to kill him on the way.
\bibverse{4} However Festus answered that Paul should be kept in custody
at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart shortly.
\bibverse{5} ``Let them therefore'', he said, ``that are in power
amongst you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong in the man,
let them accuse him.''

\bibverse{6} When he had stayed amongst them more than ten days, he went
down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the judgement seat, and
commanded Paul to be brought. \bibverse{7} When he had come, the Jews
who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him
many and grievous charges which they could not prove, \bibverse{8} while
he said in his defence, ``Neither against the law of the Jews, nor
against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned at all.''

\bibverse{9} But Festus, desiring to gain favour with the Jews, answered
Paul and said, ``Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be judged by
me there concerning these things?''

\bibverse{10} But Paul said, ``I am standing before Caesar's judgement
seat, where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as
you also know very well. \bibverse{11} For if I have done wrong and have
committed anything worthy of death, I don't refuse to die; but if none
of those things is true that they accuse me of, no one can give me up to
them. I appeal to Caesar!''

\bibverse{12} Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council,
answered, ``You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you shall go.''

\bibverse{13} Now when some days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice
arrived at Caesarea and greeted Festus. \bibverse{14} As he stayed there
many days, Festus laid Paul's case before the king, saying, ``There is a
certain man left a prisoner by Felix; \bibverse{15} about whom, when I
was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed
me, asking for a sentence against him. \bibverse{16} I answered them
that it is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to
destruction before the accused has met the accusers face to face and has
had opportunity to make his defence concerning the matter laid against
him. \bibverse{17} When therefore they had come together here, I didn't
delay, but on the next day sat on the judgement seat and commanded the
man to be brought. \bibverse{18} When the accusers stood up, they
brought no charges against him of such things as I supposed;
\bibverse{19} but had certain questions against him about their own
religion and about one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be
alive. \bibverse{20} Being perplexed how to enquire concerning these
things, I asked whether he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be
judged concerning these matters. \bibverse{21} But when Paul had
appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to
be kept until I could send him to Caesar.''

\bibverse{22} Agrippa said to Festus, ``I also would like to hear the
man myself.''

``Tomorrow,'' he said, ``you shall hear him.''

\bibverse{23} So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come with
great pomp, and they had entered into the place of hearing with the
commanding officers and the principal men of the city, at the command of
Festus, Paul was brought in. \bibverse{24} Festus said, ``King Agrippa,
and all men who are here present with us, you see this man about whom
all the multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here,
crying that he ought not to live any longer. \bibverse{25} But when I
found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself
appealed to the emperor, I determined to send him, \bibverse{26} of whom
I have no certain thing to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought
him out before you, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after
examination I may have something to write. \bibverse{27} For it seems to
me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges
against him.''

\hypertarget{section-25}{%
\section{26}\label{section-25}}

\bibverse{1} Agrippa said to Paul, ``You may speak for yourself.''

Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defence. \bibverse{2} ``I
think myself happy, King Agrippa, that I am to make my defence before
you today concerning all the things that I am accused by the Jews,
\bibverse{3} especially because you are expert in all customs and
questions which are amongst the Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me
patiently.

\bibverse{4} ``Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life from my youth
up, which was from the beginning amongst my own nation and at Jerusalem;
\bibverse{5} having known me from the first, if they are willing to
testify, that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a
Pharisee. \bibverse{6} Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the
promise made by God to our fathers, \bibverse{7} which our twelve
tribes, earnestly serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this
hope I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa! \bibverse{8} Why is it
judged incredible with you if God does raise the dead?

\bibverse{9} ``I myself most certainly thought that I ought to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. \bibverse{10} I also
did this in Jerusalem. I both shut up many of the saints in prisons,
having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put
to death I gave my vote against them. \bibverse{11} Punishing them often
in all the synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly
enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.

\bibverse{12} ``Whereupon as I travelled to Damascus with the authority
and commission from the chief priests, \bibverse{13} at noon, O king, I
saw on the way a light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining
around me and those who travelled with me. \bibverse{14} When we had all
fallen to the earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew
language, `Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to
kick against the goads.'

\bibverse{15} ``I said, `Who are you, Lord?'

``He said, `I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. \bibverse{16} But
arise, and stand on your feet, for I have appeared to you for this
purpose: to appoint you a servant and a witness both of the things which
you have seen and of the things which I will reveal to you;
\bibverse{17} delivering you from the people and from the Gentiles, to
whom I send you, \bibverse{18} to open their eyes, that they may turn
from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may
receive remission of sins and an inheritance amongst those who are
sanctified by faith in me.'

\bibverse{19} ``Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision, \bibverse{20} but declared first to them of Damascus,
at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the
Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of
repentance. \bibverse{21} For this reason the Jews seized me in the
temple and tried to kill me. \bibverse{22} Having therefore obtained the
help that is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and
great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would happen,
\bibverse{23} how the Christ must suffer, and how, by the resurrection
of the dead, he would be first to proclaim light both to these people
and to the Gentiles.''

\bibverse{24} As he thus made his defence, Festus said with a loud
voice, ``Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you
insane!''

\bibverse{25} But he said, ``I am not crazy, most excellent Festus, but
boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness. \bibverse{26} For the
king knows of these things, to whom also I speak freely. For I am
persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him, for this has not
been done in a corner. \bibverse{27} King Agrippa, do you believe the
prophets? I know that you believe.''

\bibverse{28} Agrippa said to Paul, ``With a little persuasion are you
trying to make me a Christian?''

\bibverse{29} Paul said, ``I pray to God, that whether with little or
with much, not only you, but also all that hear me today, might become
such as I am, except for these bonds.''

\bibverse{30} The king rose up with the governor and Bernice, and those
who sat with them. \bibverse{31} When they had withdrawn, they spoke to
one another, saying, ``This man does nothing worthy of death or of
bonds.'' \bibverse{32} Agrippa said to Festus, ``This man might have
been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.''

\hypertarget{section-26}{%
\section{27}\label{section-26}}

\bibverse{1} When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they
delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius,
of the Augustan band. \bibverse{2} Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium,
which was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea,
Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica being with us. \bibverse{3}
The next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius treated Paul kindly and gave
him permission to go to his friends and refresh himself. \bibverse{4}
Putting to sea from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because
the winds were contrary. \bibverse{5} When we had sailed across the sea
which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
\bibverse{6} There the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for
Italy, and he put us on board. \bibverse{7} When we had sailed slowly
many days, and had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not
allowing us further, we sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.
\bibverse{8} With difficulty sailing along it we came to a certain place
called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea.

\bibverse{9} When much time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous
because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul admonished them
\bibverse{10} and said to them, ``Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will
be with injury and much loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but
also of our lives.'' \bibverse{11} But the centurion gave more heed to
the master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were
spoken by Paul. \bibverse{12} Because the haven was not suitable to
winter in, the majority advised going to sea from there, if by any means
they could reach Phoenix and winter there, which is a port of Crete,
looking southwest and northwest.

\bibverse{13} When the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had
obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete,
close to shore. \bibverse{14} But before long, a stormy wind beat down
from shore, which is called Euroclydon.\footnote{27:14 Or, ``a
  northeaster''.} \bibverse{15} When the ship was caught and couldn't
face the wind, we gave way to it and were driven along. \bibverse{16}
Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda, we were able,
with difficulty, to secure the boat. \bibverse{17} After they had
hoisted it up, they used cables to help reinforce the ship. Fearing that
they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea
anchor, and so were driven along. \bibverse{18} As we laboured
exceedingly with the storm, the next day they began to throw things
overboard. \bibverse{19} On the third day, they threw out the ship's
tackle with their own hands. \bibverse{20} When neither sun nor stars
shone on us for many days, and no small storm pressed on us, all hope
that we would be saved was now taken away.

\bibverse{21} When they had been long without food, Paul stood up in the
middle of them and said, ``Sirs, you should have listened to me, and not
have set sail from Crete and have gotten this injury and loss.
\bibverse{22} Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of
life amongst you, but only of the ship. \bibverse{23} For there stood by
me this night an angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I
serve, \bibverse{24} saying, `Don't be afraid, Paul. You must stand
before Caesar. Behold, God has granted you all those who sail with you.'
\bibverse{25} Therefore, sirs, cheer up! For I believe God, that it will
be just as it has been spoken to me. \bibverse{26} But we must run
aground on a certain island.''

\bibverse{27} But when the fourteenth night had come, as we were driven
back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors surmised
that they were drawing near to some land. \bibverse{28} They took
soundings and found twenty fathoms.\footnote{27:28 20 fathoms = 120 feet
  = 36.6 metres} After a little while, they took soundings again, and
found fifteen fathoms.+ 27:28 15 fathoms = 90 feet = 27.4 metres
\bibverse{29} Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground, they
let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for daylight.
\bibverse{30} As the sailors were trying to flee out of the ship and had
lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they would lay out
anchors from the bow, \bibverse{31} Paul said to the centurion and to
the soldiers, ``Unless these stay in the ship, you can't be saved.''
\bibverse{32} Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat and let
it fall off.

\bibverse{33} While the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take
some food, saying, ``Today is the fourteenth day that you wait and
continue fasting, having taken nothing. \bibverse{34} Therefore I beg
you to take some food, for this is for your safety; for not a hair will
perish from any of your heads.'' \bibverse{35} When he had said this and
had taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all; then he
broke it and began to eat. \bibverse{36} Then they all cheered up, and
they also took food. \bibverse{37} In all, we were two hundred and
seventy-six souls on the ship. \bibverse{38} When they had eaten enough,
they lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.
\bibverse{39} When it was day, they didn't recognise the land, but they
noticed a certain bay with a beach, and they decided to try to drive the
ship onto it. \bibverse{40} Casting off the anchors, they left them in
the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the
foresail to the wind, they made for the beach. \bibverse{41} But coming
to a place where two seas met, they ran the vessel aground. The bow
struck and remained immovable, but the stern began to break up by the
violence of the waves.

\bibverse{42} The soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, so that
none of them would swim out and escape. \bibverse{43} But the centurion,
desiring to save Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded
that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go
towards the land; \bibverse{44} and the rest should follow, some on
planks and some on other things from the ship. So they all escaped
safely to the land.

\hypertarget{section-27}{%
\section{28}\label{section-27}}

\bibverse{1} When we had escaped, then they\footnote{28:1 NU reads
  ``we''} learnt that the island was called Malta. \bibverse{2} The
natives showed us uncommon kindness; for they kindled a fire and
received us all, because of the present rain and because of the cold.
\bibverse{3} But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them
on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened on his
hand. \bibverse{4} When the natives saw the creature hanging from his
hand, they said to one another, ``No doubt this man is a murderer, whom,
though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not allowed to
live.'' \bibverse{5} However he shook off the creature into the fire,
and wasn't harmed. \bibverse{6} But they expected that he would have
swollen or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they watched for a long
time and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds and
said that he was a god.

\bibverse{7} Now in the neighbourhood of that place were lands belonging
to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who received us and
courteously entertained us for three days. \bibverse{8} The father of
Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to him, prayed,
and laying his hands on him, healed him. \bibverse{9} Then when this was
done, the rest also who had diseases in the island came and were cured.
\bibverse{10} They also honoured us with many honours; and when we
sailed, they put on board the things that we needed.

\bibverse{11} After three months, we set sail in a ship of Alexandria
which had wintered in the island, whose figurehead was ``The Twin
Brothers.'' \bibverse{12} Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there three
days. \bibverse{13} From there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium.
After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to
Puteoli, \bibverse{14} where we found brothers,\footnote{28:14 The word
  for ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be correctly
  translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} and were
entreated to stay with them for seven days. So we came to Rome.
\bibverse{15} From there the brothers, when they heard of us, came to
meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns. When Paul
saw them, he thanked God and took courage. \bibverse{16} When we entered
into Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the
guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who
guarded him.

\bibverse{17} After three days Paul called together those who were the
leaders of the Jews. When they had come together, he said to them, ``I,
brothers, though I had done nothing against the people or the customs of
our fathers, still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands
of the Romans, \bibverse{18} who, when they had examined me, desired to
set me free, because there was no cause of death in me. \bibverse{19}
But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal to
Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation.
\bibverse{20} For this cause therefore I asked to see you and to speak
with you. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this
chain.''

\bibverse{21} They said to him, ``We neither received letters from Judea
concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here and report or
speak any evil of you. \bibverse{22} But we desire to hear from you what
you think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that
everywhere it is spoken against.''

\bibverse{23} When they had appointed him a day, many people came to him
at his lodging. He explained to them, testifying about God's Kingdom,
and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and
from the prophets, from morning until evening. \bibverse{24} Some
believed the things which were spoken, and some disbelieved.
\bibverse{25} When they didn't agree amongst themselves, they departed
after Paul had spoken one message: ``The Holy Spirit spoke rightly
through Isaiah the prophet to our fathers, \bibverse{26} saying, `Go to
this people and say, in hearing, you will hear, but will in no way
understand. In seeing, you will see, but will in no way perceive.
\bibverse{27} For this people's heart has grown callous. Their ears are
dull of hearing. Their eyes they have closed. Lest they should see with
their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and would
turn again, then I would heal them.'\footnote{28:27 Isaiah 6:9-10}

\bibverse{28} ``Be it known therefore to you that the salvation of God
is sent to the nations, and they will listen.''

\bibverse{29} When he had said these words, the Jews departed, having a
great dispute amongst themselves.\footnote{28:29 NU omits verse 29.}

\bibverse{30} Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house and
received all who were coming to him, \bibverse{31} preaching God's
Kingdom and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with
all boldness, without hindrance.
