\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} Paul, an apostle---not from men, nor through man, but
through Jesus Christ,\footnote{1:1 ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.}
and God the Father, who raised him from the dead--- \bibverse{2} and all
the brothers+ 1:2 The word for ``brothers'' here and where context
allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers and sisters'' or
``siblings.'' who are with me, to the assemblies of Galatia:
\bibverse{3} Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord
Jesus Christ, \bibverse{4} who gave himself for our sins, that he might
deliver us out of this present evil age, according to the will of our
God and Father--- \bibverse{5} to whom be the glory forever and ever.
Amen.

\bibverse{6} I marvel that you are so quickly deserting him who called
you in the grace of Christ to a different ``good news'', \bibverse{7}
but there isn't another ``good news.'' Only there are some who trouble
you and want to pervert the Good News of Christ. \bibverse{8} But even
though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach to you any ``good
news'' other than that which we preached to you, let him be cursed.
\bibverse{9} As we have said before, so I now say again: if any man
preaches to you any ``good news'' other than that which you received,
let him be cursed.

\bibverse{10} For am I now seeking the favour of men, or of God? Or am I
striving to please men? For if I were still pleasing men, I wouldn't be
a servant of Christ.

\bibverse{11} But I make known to you, brothers, concerning the Good
News which was preached by me, that it is not according to man.
\bibverse{12} For I didn't receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but
it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ. \bibverse{13} For you
have heard of my way of living in time past in the Jews' religion, how
that beyond measure I persecuted the assembly of God and ravaged it.
\bibverse{14} I advanced in the Jews' religion beyond many of my own age
amongst my countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions
of my fathers. \bibverse{15} But when it was the good pleasure of God,
who separated me from my mother's womb and called me through his grace,
\bibverse{16} to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him amongst
the Gentiles, I didn't immediately confer with flesh and blood,
\bibverse{17} nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles
before me, but I went away into Arabia. Then I returned to Damascus.

\bibverse{18} Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit
Peter, and stayed with him fifteen days. \bibverse{19} But of the other
apostles I saw no one except James, the Lord's brother. \bibverse{20}
Now about the things which I write to you, behold,\footnote{1:20
  ``Behold'', from ``ἰδοὺ'', means look at, take notice, observe, see,
  or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} before God, I'm not
lying. \bibverse{21} Then I came to the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
\bibverse{22} I was still unknown by face to the assemblies of Judea
which were in Christ, \bibverse{23} but they only heard, ``He who once
persecuted us now preaches the faith that he once tried to destroy.''
\bibverse{24} So they glorified God in me.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} Then after a period of fourteen years I went up again to
Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me. \bibverse{2} I went
up by revelation, and I laid before them the Good News which I preach
amongst the Gentiles, but privately before those who were respected, for
fear that I might be running, or had run, in vain. \bibverse{3} But not
even Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
circumcised. \bibverse{4} This was because of the false brothers
secretly brought in, who stole in to spy out our liberty which we have
in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage, \bibverse{5} to
whom we gave no place in the way of subjection, not for an hour, that
the truth of the Good News might continue with you. \bibverse{6} But
from those who were reputed to be important---whatever they were, it
makes no difference to me; God doesn't show partiality to man---they, I
say, who were respected imparted nothing to me, \bibverse{7} but to the
contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the Good News for
the uncircumcised, even as Peter with the Good News for the
circumcised--- \bibverse{8} for he who worked through Peter in the
apostleship with the circumcised also worked through me with the
Gentiles--- \bibverse{9} and when they perceived the grace that was
given to me, James and Cephas and John, those who were reputed to be
pillars, gave to Barnabas and me the right hand of fellowship, that we
should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision. \bibverse{10}
They only asked us to remember the poor---which very thing I was also
zealous to do.

\bibverse{11} But when Peter came to Antioch, I resisted him to his
face, because he stood condemned. \bibverse{12} For before some people
came from James, he ate with the Gentiles. But when they came, he drew
back and separated himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision.
\bibverse{13} And the rest of the Jews joined him in his hypocrisy, so
that even Barnabas was carried away with their hypocrisy. \bibverse{14}
But when I saw that they didn't walk uprightly according to the truth of
the Good News, I said to Peter before them all, ``If you, being a Jew,
live as the Gentiles do, and not as the Jews do, why do you compel the
Gentiles to live as the Jews do?

\bibverse{15} ``We, being Jews by nature and not Gentile sinners,
\bibverse{16} yet knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we believed in Christ
Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ and not by the
works of the law, because no flesh will be justified by the works of the
law. \bibverse{17} But if while we sought to be justified in Christ, we
ourselves also were found sinners, is Christ a servant of sin? Certainly
not! \bibverse{18} For if I build up again those things which I
destroyed, I prove myself a law-breaker. \bibverse{19} For I through the
law died to the law, that I might live to God. \bibverse{20} I have been
crucified with Christ, and it is no longer I who live, but Christ lives
in me. That life which I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the
Son of God, who loved me and gave himself up for me. \bibverse{21} I
don't reject the grace of God. For if righteousness is through the law,
then Christ died for nothing!''

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you not to obey the
truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly portrayed amongst you
as crucified? \bibverse{2} I just want to learn this from you: Did you
receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or by hearing of faith?
\bibverse{3} Are you so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are you now
completed in the flesh? \bibverse{4} Did you suffer so many things in
vain, if it is indeed in vain? \bibverse{5} He therefore who supplies
the Spirit to you and does miracles amongst you, does he do it by the
works of the law, or by hearing of faith? \bibverse{6} Even so, Abraham
``believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness.''\footnote{3:6 Genesis 15:6} \bibverse{7} Know therefore
that those who are of faith are children of Abraham. \bibverse{8} The
Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith,
preached the Good News beforehand to Abraham, saying, ``In you all the
nations will be blessed.''+ 3:8 Genesis 12:3; 18:18; 22:18 \bibverse{9}
So then, those who are of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.

\bibverse{10} For as many as are of the works of the law are under a
curse. For it is written, ``Cursed is everyone who doesn't continue in
all things that are written in the book of the law, to do
them.''\footnote{3:10 Deuteronomy 27:26} \bibverse{11} Now that no man
is justified by the law before God is evident, for, ``The righteous will
live by faith.''+ 3:11 Habakkuk 2:4 \bibverse{12} The law is not of
faith, but, ``The man who does them will live by them.''+ 3:12 Leviticus
18:5

\bibverse{13} Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having
become a curse for us. For it is written, ``Cursed is everyone who hangs
on a tree,''\footnote{3:13 Deuteronomy 21:23} \bibverse{14} that the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus,
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.

\bibverse{15} Brothers, speaking of human terms, though it is only a
man's covenant, yet when it has been confirmed, no one makes it void or
adds to it. \bibverse{16} Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to
his offspring.\footnote{3:16 or, seed} He doesn't say, ``To descendants+
3:16 or, seeds'', as of many, but as of one, ``To your offspring'',+
3:16 Genesis 12:7; 13:15; 24:7 which is Christ. \bibverse{17} Now I say
this: A covenant confirmed beforehand by God in Christ, the law, which
came four hundred and thirty years after, does not annul, so as to make
the promise of no effect. \bibverse{18} For if the inheritance is of the
law, it is no more of promise; but God has granted it to Abraham by
promise.

\bibverse{19} Then why is there the law? It was added because of
transgressions, until the offspring should come to whom the promise has
been made. It was ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator.
\bibverse{20} Now a mediator is not between one, but God is one.

\bibverse{21} Is the law then against the promises of God? Certainly
not! For if there had been a law given which could make alive, most
certainly righteousness would have been of the law. \bibverse{22} But
the Scripture imprisoned all things under sin, that the promise by faith
in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.

\bibverse{23} But before faith came, we were kept in custody under the
law, confined for the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
\bibverse{24} So that the law has become our tutor to bring us to
Christ, that we might be justified by faith. \bibverse{25} But now that
faith has come, we are no longer under a tutor. \bibverse{26} For you
are all children of God, through faith in Christ Jesus. \bibverse{27}
For as many of you as were baptised into Christ have put on Christ.
\bibverse{28} There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor
free man, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in
Christ Jesus. \bibverse{29} If you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's
offspring and heirs according to promise.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibverse{1} But I say that so long as the heir is a child, he is no
different from a bondservant, though he is lord of all, \bibverse{2} but
is under guardians and stewards until the day appointed by the father.
\bibverse{3} So we also, when we were children, were held in bondage
under the elemental principles of the world. \bibverse{4} But when the
fullness of the time came, God sent out his Son, born to a woman, born
under the law, \bibverse{5} that he might redeem those who were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption as children. \bibverse{6}
And because you are children, God sent out the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying, ``Abba,\footnote{4:6 Abba is a Greek spelling for
  the Aramaic word for ``Father'' or ``Daddy'' used in a familiar,
  respectful, and loving way.} Father!'' \bibverse{7} So you are no
longer a bondservant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God
through Christ.

\bibverse{8} However at that time, not knowing God, you were in bondage
to those who by nature are not gods. \bibverse{9} But now that you have
come to know God, or rather to be known by God, why do you turn back
again to the weak and miserable elemental principles, to which you
desire to be in bondage all over again? \bibverse{10} You observe days,
months, seasons, and years. \bibverse{11} I am afraid for you, that I
might have wasted my labour for you.

\bibverse{12} I beg you, brothers, become as I am, for I also have
become as you are. You did me no wrong, \bibverse{13} but you know that
because of weakness in the flesh I preached the Good News to you the
first time. \bibverse{14} That which was a temptation to you in my
flesh, you didn't despise nor reject; but you received me as an angel of
God, even as Christ Jesus.

\bibverse{15} What was the blessing you enjoyed? For I testify to you
that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes and given them
to me. \bibverse{16} So then, have I become your enemy by telling you
the truth? \bibverse{17} They zealously seek you in no good way. No,
they desire to alienate you, that you may seek them. \bibverse{18} But
it is always good to be zealous in a good cause, and not only when I am
present with you.

\bibverse{19} My little children, of whom I am again in travail until
Christ is formed in you--- \bibverse{20} but I could wish to be present
with you now, and to change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.

\bibverse{21} Tell me, you that desire to be under the law, don't you
listen to the law? \bibverse{22} For it is written that Abraham had two
sons, one by the servant, and one by the free woman. \bibverse{23}
However, the son by the servant was born according to the flesh, but the
son by the free woman was born through promise. \bibverse{24} These
things contain an allegory, for these are two covenants. One is from
Mount Sinai, bearing children to bondage, which is Hagar. \bibverse{25}
For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to the Jerusalem
that exists now, for she is in bondage with her children. \bibverse{26}
But the Jerusalem that is above is free, which is the mother of us all.
\bibverse{27} For it is written, ``Rejoice, you barren who don't bear.
Break out and shout, you who don't travail. For the desolate women have
more children than her who has a husband.'' \footnote{4:27 Isaiah 54:1}

\bibverse{28} Now we, brothers, as Isaac was, are children of promise.
\bibverse{29} But as then, he who was born according to the flesh
persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit, so also it is now.
\bibverse{30} However, what does the Scripture say? ``Throw out the
servant and her son, for the son of the servant will not inherit with
the son of the free woman.''\footnote{4:30 Genesis 21:10} \bibverse{31}
So then, brothers, we are not children of a servant, but of the free
woman.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibverse{1} Stand firm therefore in the liberty by which Christ has
made us free, and don't be entangled again with a yoke of bondage.

\bibverse{2} Behold, I, Paul, tell you that if you receive circumcision,
Christ will profit you nothing. \bibverse{3} Yes, I testify again to
every man who receives circumcision that he is a debtor to do the whole
law. \bibverse{4} You are alienated from Christ, you who desire to be
justified by the law. You have fallen away from grace. \bibverse{5} For
we through the Spirit, by faith wait for the hope of righteousness.
\bibverse{6} For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
amounts to anything, but faith working through love.

\bibverse{7} You were running well! Who interfered with you that you
should not obey the truth? \bibverse{8} This persuasion is not from him
who calls you. \bibverse{9} A little yeast grows through the whole lump.
\bibverse{10} I have confidence towards you in the Lord that you will
think no other way. But he who troubles you will bear his judgement,
whoever he is.

\bibverse{11} But I, brothers, if I still preach circumcision, why am I
still persecuted? Then the stumbling block of the cross has been
removed. \bibverse{12} I wish that those who disturb you would cut
themselves off.

\bibverse{13} For you, brothers, were called for freedom. Only don't use
your freedom an an opportunity for the flesh, but through love be
servants to one another. \bibverse{14} For the whole law is fulfilled in
one word, in this: ``You shall love your neighbour as
yourself.''\footnote{5:14 Leviticus 19:18} \bibverse{15} But if you bite
and devour one another, be careful that you don't consume one another.

\bibverse{16} But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you won't fulfil the
lust of the flesh. \bibverse{17} For the flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary to one another,
that you may not do the things that you desire. \bibverse{18} But if you
are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law. \bibverse{19} Now the
deeds of the flesh are obvious, which are: adultery, sexual immorality,
uncleanness, lustfulness, \bibverse{20} idolatry, sorcery, hatred,
strife, jealousies, outbursts of anger, rivalries, divisions, heresies,
\bibverse{21} envy, murders, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these;
of which I forewarn you, even as I also forewarned you, that those who
practise such things will not inherit God's Kingdom.

\bibverse{22} But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, goodness, faith,\footnote{5:22 or, faithfulness} \bibverse{23}
gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law.
\bibverse{24} Those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with
its passions and lusts.

\bibverse{25} If we live by the Spirit, let's also walk by the Spirit.
\bibverse{26} Let's not become conceited, provoking one another, and
envying one another.

\hypertarget{section-5}{%
\section{6}\label{section-5}}

\bibverse{1} Brothers, even if a man is caught in some fault, you who
are spiritual must restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness, looking
to yourself so that you also aren't tempted. \bibverse{2} Bear one
another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. \bibverse{3} For if
a man thinks himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. \bibverse{4} But let each man examine his own work, and then he
will have reason to boast in himself, and not in someone else.
\bibverse{5} For each man will bear his own burden.

\bibverse{6} But let him who is taught in the word share all good things
with him who teaches.

\bibverse{7} Don't be deceived. God is not mocked, for whatever a man
sows, that he will also reap. \bibverse{8} For he who sows to his own
flesh will from the flesh reap corruption. But he who sows to the Spirit
will from the Spirit reap eternal life. \bibverse{9} Let's not be weary
in doing good, for we will reap in due season if we don't give up.
\bibverse{10} So then, as we have opportunity, let's do what is good
towards all men, and especially towards those who are of the household
of the faith.

\bibverse{11} See with what large letters I write to you with my own
hand. \bibverse{12} As many as desire to make a good impression in the
flesh compel you to be circumcised, just so they may not be persecuted
for the cross of Christ. \bibverse{13} For even they who receive
circumcision don't keep the law themselves, but they desire to have you
circumcised, so that they may boast in your flesh. \bibverse{14} But far
be it from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
\bibverse{15} For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creation. \bibverse{16} As many as walk by
this rule, peace and mercy be on them, and on God's Israel.

\bibverse{17} From now on, let no one cause me any trouble, for I bear
the marks of the Lord Jesus branded on my body.

\bibverse{18} The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit,
brothers. Amen.
