\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} Paul, an apostle of Christ\footnote{\textbf{1:1}
  ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} Jesus through the will of God, and
Timothy our brother, \bibleverse{2} to the saints and faithful
brothers\footnote{\textbf{1:2} The word for ``brothers'' here and where
  context allows may also be correctly translated ``brothers and
  sisters'' or ``siblings.''} in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and
peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

\bibleverse{3} We give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, praying always for you, \bibleverse{4} having heard of your
faith in Christ Jesus and of the love which you have towards all the
saints, \bibleverse{5} because of the hope which is laid up for you in
the heavens, of which you heard before in the word of the truth of the
Good News \bibleverse{6} which has come to you, even as it is in all the
world and is bearing fruit and growing, as it does in you also, since
the day you heard and knew the grace of God in truth, \bibleverse{7}
even as you learnt from Epaphras our beloved fellow servant, who is a
faithful servant of Christ on your\footnote{\textbf{1:7} NU reads our}
behalf, \bibleverse{8} who also declared to us your love in the Spirit.

\bibleverse{9} For this cause, we also, since the day we heard this,
don't cease praying and making requests for you, that you may be filled
with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and
understanding, \bibleverse{10} that you may walk worthily of the Lord,
to please him in all respects, bearing fruit in every good work and
increasing in the knowledge of God, \bibleverse{11} strengthened with
all power, according to the might of his glory, for all endurance and
perseverance with joy, \bibleverse{12} giving thanks to the Father, who
made us fit to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light,
\bibleverse{13} who delivered us out of the power of darkness, and
translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of his love, \bibleverse{14}
in whom we have our redemption,\footnote{\textbf{1:14} TR adds ``through
  his blood,''} the forgiveness of our sins.

\bibleverse{15} He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of
all creation. \bibleverse{16} For by him all things were created in the
heavens and on the earth, visible things and invisible things, whether
thrones or dominions or principalities or powers. All things have been
created through him and for him. \bibleverse{17} He is before all
things, and in him all things are held together. \bibleverse{18} He is
the head of the body, the assembly, who is the beginning, the firstborn
from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence.
\bibleverse{19} For all the fullness was pleased to dwell in him,
\bibleverse{20} and through him to reconcile all things to himself by
him, whether things on the earth or things in the heavens, having made
peace through the blood of his cross.

\bibleverse{21} You, being in past times alienated and enemies in your
mind in your evil deeds, \bibleverse{22} yet now he has reconciled in
the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and without
defect and blameless before him, \bibleverse{23} if it is so that you
continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, and not moved away from
the hope of the Good News which you heard, which is being proclaimed in
all creation under heaven, of which I, Paul, was made a servant.

\bibleverse{24} Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and fill
up on my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh for his body's sake, which is the assembly, \bibleverse{25} of
which I was made a servant according to the stewardship of God which was
given me towards you to fulfil the word of God, \bibleverse{26} the
mystery which has been hidden for ages and generations. But now it has
been revealed to his saints, \bibleverse{27} to whom God was pleased to
make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery amongst the
Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. \bibleverse{28} We
proclaim him, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus;
\bibleverse{29} for which I also labour, striving according to his
working, which works in me mightily.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} For I desire to have you know how greatly I struggle for
you and for those at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face
in the flesh; \bibleverse{2} that their hearts may be comforted, they
being knit together in love, and gaining all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, that they may know the mystery of God, both
of the Father and of Christ, \bibleverse{3} in whom all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hidden. \bibleverse{4} Now I say this that no
one may delude you with persuasiveness of speech. \bibleverse{5} For
though I am absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit,
rejoicing and seeing your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ.

\bibleverse{6} As therefore you received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in
him, \bibleverse{7} rooted and built up in him and established in the
faith, even as you were taught, abounding in it in thanksgiving.

\bibleverse{8} Be careful that you don't let anyone rob you through his
philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
elemental spirits of the world, and not after Christ. \bibleverse{9} For
in him all the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily, \bibleverse{10} and
in him you are made full, who is the head of all principality and power.
\bibleverse{11} In him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not
made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the sins of the
flesh, in the circumcision of Christ, \bibleverse{12} having been buried
with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through
faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
\bibleverse{13} You were dead through your trespasses and the
uncircumcision of your flesh. He made you alive together with him,
having forgiven us all our trespasses, \bibleverse{14} wiping out the
handwriting in ordinances which was against us. He has taken it out of
the way, nailing it to the cross. \bibleverse{15} Having stripped the
principalities and the powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it.

\bibleverse{16} Let no one therefore judge you in eating or drinking, or
with respect to a feast day or a new moon or a Sabbath day,
\bibleverse{17} which are a shadow of the things to come; but the body
is Christ's. \bibleverse{18} Let no one rob you of your prize by
self-abasement and worshipping of the angels, dwelling in the things
which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
\bibleverse{19} and not holding firmly to the Head, from whom all the
body, being supplied and knit together through the joints and ligaments,
grows with God's growth.

\bibleverse{20} If you died with Christ from the elemental spirits of
the world, why, as though living in the world, do you subject yourselves
to ordinances, \bibleverse{21} ``Don't handle, nor taste, nor touch''
\bibleverse{22} (all of which perish with use), according to the
precepts and doctrines of men? \bibleverse{23} These things indeed
appear like wisdom in self-imposed worship, humility, and severity to
the body, but aren't of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} If then you were raised together with Christ, seek the
things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God.
\bibleverse{2} Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the
things that are on the earth. \bibleverse{3} For you died, and your life
is hidden with Christ in God. \bibleverse{4} When Christ, our life, is
revealed, then you will also be revealed with him in glory.

\bibleverse{5} Put to death therefore your members which are on the
earth: sexual immorality, uncleanness, depraved passion, evil desire,
and covetousness, which is idolatry. \bibleverse{6} For these things'
sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
\bibleverse{7} You also once walked in those, when you lived in them,
\bibleverse{8} but now you must put them all away: anger, wrath, malice,
slander, and shameful speaking out of your mouth. \bibleverse{9} Don't
lie to one another, seeing that you have put off the old man with his
doings, \bibleverse{10} and have put on the new man, who is being
renewed in knowledge after the image of his Creator, \bibleverse{11}
where there can't be Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision,
barbarian, Scythian, bondservant, or free person; but Christ is all, and
in all.

\bibleverse{12} Put on therefore, as God's chosen ones, holy and
beloved, a heart of compassion, kindness, lowliness, humility, and
perseverance; \bibleverse{13} bearing with one another, and forgiving
each other, if any man has a complaint against any; even as Christ
forgave you, so you also do.

\bibleverse{14} Above all these things, walk in love, which is the bond
of perfection. \bibleverse{15} And let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to which also you were called in one body, and be thankful.
\bibleverse{16} Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; in all
wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your heart to the Lord.

\bibleverse{17} Whatever you do, in word or in deed, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.

\bibleverse{18} Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting
in the Lord.

\bibleverse{19} Husbands, love your wives, and don't be bitter against
them.

\bibleverse{20} Children, obey your parents in all things, for this
pleases the Lord.

\bibleverse{21} Fathers, don't provoke your children, so that they won't
be discouraged.

\bibleverse{22} Servants, obey in all things those who are your masters
according to the flesh, not just when they are looking, as men pleasers,
but in singleness of heart, fearing God. \bibleverse{23} And whatever
you do, work heartily, as for the Lord and not for men, \bibleverse{24}
knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the
inheritance; for you serve the Lord Christ. \bibleverse{25} But he who
does wrong will receive again for the wrong that he has done, and there
is no partiality.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Masters, give to your servants that which is just and
equal, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.

\bibleverse{2} Continue steadfastly in prayer, watching in it with
thanksgiving, \bibleverse{3} praying together for us also, that God may
open to us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for
which I am also in bonds, \bibleverse{4} that I may reveal it as I ought
to speak.

\bibleverse{5} Walk in wisdom towards those who are outside, redeeming
the time. \bibleverse{6} Let your speech always be with grace, seasoned
with salt, that you may know how you ought to answer each one.

\bibleverse{7} All my affairs will be made known to you by Tychicus, the
beloved brother, faithful servant, and fellow bondservant in the Lord.
\bibleverse{8} I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that he
may know your circumstances and comfort your hearts, \bibleverse{9}
together with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of
you. They will make known to you everything that is going on here.

\bibleverse{10} Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you, and Mark
the cousin of Barnabas (concerning whom you received instructions, ``if
he comes to you, receive him''), \bibleverse{11} and Jesus who is called
Justus. These are my only fellow workers for God's Kingdom who are of
the circumcision, men who have been a comfort to me.

\bibleverse{12} Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ,
salutes you, always striving for you in his prayers, that you may stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God. \bibleverse{13} For I
testify about him that he has great zeal for you, and for those in
Laodicea, and for those in Hierapolis. \bibleverse{14} Luke the beloved
physician and Demas greet you. \bibleverse{15} Greet the brothers who
are in Laodicea, with Nymphas and the assembly that is in his house.
\bibleverse{16} When this letter has been read amongst you, cause it to
be read also in the assembly of the Laodiceans, and that you also read
the letter from Laodicea. \bibleverse{17} Tell Archippus, ``Take heed to
the ministry which you have received in the Lord, that you fulfil it.''

\bibleverse{18} I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. Remember
my chains. Grace be with you. Amen.
