\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibverse{1} Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus
Christ,\footnote{1:1 ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} according to
the faith of God's chosen ones and the knowledge of the truth which is
according to godliness, \bibverse{2} in hope of eternal life, which God,
who can't lie, promised before time began; \bibverse{3} but in his own
time revealed his word in the message with which I was entrusted
according to the commandment of God our Saviour, \bibverse{4} to Titus,
my true child according to a common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from
God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour.

\bibverse{5} I left you in Crete for this reason, that you would set in
order the things that were lacking and appoint elders in every city, as
I directed you--- \bibverse{6} if anyone is blameless, the husband of
one wife, having children who believe, who are not accused of loose or
unruly behaviour. \bibverse{7} For the overseer must be blameless, as
God's steward, not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not given to wine,
not violent, not greedy for dishonest gain; \bibverse{8} but given to
hospitality, a lover of good, sober minded, fair, holy, self-controlled,
\bibverse{9} holding to the faithful word which is according to the
teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to
convict those who contradict him.

\bibverse{10} For there are also many unruly men, vain talkers and
deceivers, especially those of the circumcision, \bibverse{11} whose
mouths must be stopped: men who overthrow whole houses, teaching things
which they ought not, for dishonest gain's sake. \bibverse{12} One of
them, a prophet of their own, said, ``Cretans are always liars, evil
beasts, and idle gluttons.'' \bibverse{13} This testimony is true. For
this cause, reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
\bibverse{14} not paying attention to Jewish fables and commandments of
men who turn away from the truth. \bibverse{15} To the pure, all things
are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure;
but both their mind and their conscience are defiled. \bibverse{16} They
profess that they know God, but by their deeds they deny him, being
abominable, disobedient, and unfit for any good work.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibverse{1} But say the things which fit sound doctrine, \bibverse{2}
that older men should be temperate, sensible, sober minded, sound in
faith, in love, and in perseverance, \bibverse{3} and that older women
likewise be reverent in behaviour, not slanderers nor enslaved to much
wine, teachers of that which is good, \bibverse{4} that they may train
the young wives to love their husbands, to love their children,
\bibverse{5} to be sober minded, chaste, workers at home, kind, being in
subjection to their own husbands, that God's word may not be blasphemed.

\bibverse{6} Likewise, exhort the younger men to be sober minded.
\bibverse{7} In all things show yourself an example of good works. In
your teaching, show integrity, seriousness, incorruptibility,
\bibverse{8} and soundness of speech that can't be condemned, that he
who opposes you may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say about us.

\bibverse{9} Exhort servants to be in subjection to their own masters
and to be well-pleasing in all things, not contradicting, \bibverse{10}
not stealing, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the
doctrine of God, our Saviour, in all things. \bibverse{11} For the grace
of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men, \bibverse{12}
instructing us to the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we would live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
age; \bibverse{13} looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the
glory of our great God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, \bibverse{14} who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity and purify for
himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good works.

\bibverse{15} Say these things and exhort and reprove with all
authority. Let no one despise you.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibverse{1} Remind them to be in subjection to rulers and to
authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
\bibverse{2} to speak evil of no one, not to be contentious, to be
gentle, showing all humility towards all men. \bibverse{3} For we were
also once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving various lusts and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.
\bibverse{4} But when the kindness of God our Saviour and his love
towards mankind appeared, \bibverse{5} not by works of righteousness
which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy, he saved us through
the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit,
\bibverse{6} whom he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our
Saviour; \bibverse{7} that being justified by his grace, we might be
made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. \bibverse{8} This
saying is faithful, and concerning these things I desire that you insist
confidently, so that those who have believed God may be careful to
maintain good works. These things are good and profitable to men;
\bibverse{9} but shun foolish questionings, genealogies, strife, and
disputes about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.
\bibverse{10} Avoid a factious man after a first and second warning,
\bibverse{11} knowing that such a one is perverted and sinful, being
self-condemned.

\bibverse{12} When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, be diligent to
come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined to winter there.
\bibverse{13} Send Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey
speedily, that nothing may be lacking for them. \bibverse{14} Let our
people also learn to maintain good works to meet necessary needs, that
they may not be unfruitful.

\bibverse{15} All who are with me greet you. Greet those who love us in
faith.

Grace be with you all. Amen.
