\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus
Christ,\footnote{\textbf{1:1} ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} to the
twelve tribes which are in the Dispersion: Greetings.

\bibleverse{2} Count it all joy, my brothers,\footnote{\textbf{1:2} The
  word for ``brothers'' here and where context allows may also be
  correctly translated ``brothers and sisters'' or ``siblings.''} when
you fall into various temptations, \bibleverse{3} knowing that the
testing of your faith produces endurance. \bibleverse{4} Let endurance
have its perfect work, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in
nothing.

\bibleverse{5} But if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who
gives to all liberally and without reproach, and it will be given to
him. \bibleverse{6} But let him ask in faith, without any doubting, for
he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed.
\bibleverse{7} For that man shouldn't think that he will receive
anything from the Lord. \bibleverse{8} He is a double-minded man,
unstable in all his ways.

\bibleverse{9} Let the brother in humble circumstances glory in his high
position; \bibleverse{10} and the rich, in that he is made humble,
because like the flower in the grass, he will pass away. \bibleverse{11}
For the sun arises with the scorching wind and withers the grass; and
the flower in it falls, and the beauty of its appearance perishes. So
the rich man will also fade away in his pursuits.

\bibleverse{12} Blessed is a person who endures temptation, for when he
has been approved, he will receive the crown of life which the Lord
promised to those who love him.

\bibleverse{13} Let no man say when he is tempted, ``I am tempted by
God,'' for God can't be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one.
\bibleverse{14} But each one is tempted when he is drawn away by his own
lust and enticed. \bibleverse{15} Then the lust, when it has conceived,
bears sin. The sin, when it is full grown, produces death.
\bibleverse{16} Don't be deceived, my beloved brothers. \bibleverse{17}
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from
the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation nor turning shadow.
\bibleverse{18} Of his own will he gave birth to us by the word of
truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.

\bibleverse{19} So, then, my beloved brothers, let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger; \bibleverse{20} for the anger of
man doesn't produce the righteousness of God. \bibleverse{21} Therefore,
putting away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness, receive with
humility the implanted word, which is able to save your
souls.\footnote{\textbf{1:21} or, preserve your life.}

\bibleverse{22} But be doers of the word, and not only hearers, deluding
your own selves. \bibleverse{23} For if anyone is a hearer of the word
and not a doer, he is like a man looking at his natural face in a
mirror; \bibleverse{24} for he sees himself, and goes away, and
immediately forgets what kind of man he was. \bibleverse{25} But he who
looks into the perfect law of freedom and continues, not being a hearer
who forgets but a doer of the work, this man will be blessed in what he
does.

\bibleverse{26} If anyone amongst you thinks himself to be religious
while he doesn't bridle his tongue, but deceives his heart, this man's
religion is worthless. \bibleverse{27} Pure religion and undefiled
before our God and Father is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in
their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained by the world.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} My brothers, don't hold the faith of our glorious Lord
Jesus Christ with partiality. \bibleverse{2} For if a man with a gold
ring, in fine clothing, comes into your synagogue,\footnote{\textbf{2:2}
  or, meeting} and a poor man in filthy clothing also comes in,
\bibleverse{3} and you pay special attention to him who wears the fine
clothing and say, ``Sit here in a good place;'' and you tell the poor
man, ``Stand there,'' or ``Sit by my footstool'' \bibleverse{4} haven't
you shown partiality amongst yourselves, and become judges with evil
thoughts? \bibleverse{5} Listen, my beloved brothers. Didn't God choose
those who are poor in this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the
Kingdom which he promised to those who love him? \bibleverse{6} But you
have dishonoured the poor man. Don't the rich oppress you and personally
drag you before the courts? \bibleverse{7} Don't they blaspheme the
honourable name by which you are called?

\bibleverse{8} However, if you fulfil the royal law according to the
Scripture, ``You shall love your neighbour as yourself,''\footnote{\textbf{2:8}
  Leviticus 19:18} you do well. \bibleverse{9} But if you show
partiality, you commit sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
\bibleverse{10} For whoever keeps the whole law, and yet stumbles in one
point, he has become guilty of all. \bibleverse{11} For he who said,
``Do not commit adultery,''\footnote{\textbf{2:11} Exodus 20:14;
  Deuteronomy 5:18} also said, ``Do not commit murder.''\footnote{\textbf{2:11}
  Exodus 20:13; Deuteronomy 5:17} Now if you do not commit adultery but
do murder, you have become a transgressor of the law. \bibleverse{12} So
speak and so do as men who are to be judged by the law of freedom.
\bibleverse{13} For judgement is without mercy to him who has shown no
mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgement.

\bibleverse{14} What good is it, my brothers, if a man says he has
faith, but has no works? Can faith save him? \bibleverse{15} And if a
brother or sister is naked and in lack of daily food, \bibleverse{16}
and one of you tells them, ``Go in peace. Be warmed and filled;'' yet
you didn't give them the things the body needs, what good is it?
\bibleverse{17} Even so faith, if it has no works, is dead in itself.
\bibleverse{18} Yes, a man will say, ``You have faith, and I have
works.'' Show me your faith without works, and I will show you my faith
by my works.

\bibleverse{19} You believe that God is one. You do well. The demons
also believe---and shudder. \bibleverse{20} But do you want to know,
vain man, that faith apart from works is dead? \bibleverse{21} Wasn't
Abraham our father justified by works, in that he offered up Isaac his
son on the altar? \bibleverse{22} You see that faith worked with his
works, and by works faith was perfected. \bibleverse{23} So the
Scripture was fulfilled which says, ``Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted to him as righteousness,''\footnote{\textbf{2:23} Genesis 15:6}
and he was called the friend of God. \bibleverse{24} You see then that
by works a man is justified, and not only by faith. \bibleverse{25} In
the same way, wasn't Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when
she received the messengers and sent them out another way?
\bibleverse{26} For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so
faith apart from works is dead.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} Let not many of you be teachers, my brothers, knowing
that we will receive heavier judgement. \bibleverse{2} For we all
stumble in many things. Anyone who doesn't stumble in word is a perfect
person, able to bridle the whole body also. \bibleverse{3} Indeed, we
put bits into the horses' mouths so that they may obey us, and we guide
their whole body. \bibleverse{4} Behold,\footnote{\textbf{3:4}
  ``Behold'', from ``ἰδοὺ'', means look at, take notice, observe, see,
  or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.} the ships also,
though they are so big and are driven by fierce winds, are yet guided by
a very small rudder, wherever the pilot desires. \bibleverse{5} So the
tongue is also a little member, and boasts great things. See how a small
fire can spread to a large forest! \bibleverse{6} And the tongue is a
fire. The world of iniquity amongst our members is the tongue, which
defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is
set on fire by Gehenna.\footnote{\textbf{3:6} or, Hell} \bibleverse{7}
For every kind of animal, bird, creeping thing, and sea creature is
tamed, and has been tamed by mankind; \bibleverse{8} but nobody can tame
the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison. \bibleverse{9}
With it we bless our God and Father, and with it we curse men who are
made in the image of God. \bibleverse{10} Out of the same mouth comes
blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so.
\bibleverse{11} Does a spring send out from the same opening fresh and
bitter water? \bibleverse{12} Can a fig tree, my brothers, yield olives,
or a vine figs? Thus no spring yields both salt water and fresh water.

\bibleverse{13} Who is wise and understanding amongst you? Let him show
by his good conduct that his deeds are done in gentleness of wisdom.
\bibleverse{14} But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in
your heart, don't boast and don't lie against the truth. \bibleverse{15}
This wisdom is not that which comes down from above, but is earthly,
sensual, and demonic. \bibleverse{16} For where jealousy and selfish
ambition are, there is confusion and every evil deed. \bibleverse{17}
But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceful, gentle,
reasonable, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and
without hypocrisy. \bibleverse{18} Now the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace by those who make peace.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Where do wars and fightings amongst you come from? Don't
they come from your pleasures that war in your members? \bibleverse{2}
You lust, and don't have. You murder and covet, and can't obtain. You
fight and make war. You don't have, because you don't ask.
\bibleverse{3} You ask, and don't receive, because you ask with wrong
motives, so that you may spend it on your pleasures. \bibleverse{4} You
adulterers and adulteresses, don't you know that friendship with the
world is hostility towards God? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend
of the world makes himself an enemy of God. \bibleverse{5} Or do you
think that the Scripture says in vain, ``The Spirit who lives in us
yearns jealously''? \bibleverse{6} But he gives more grace. Therefore it
says, ``God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble.''\footnote{\textbf{4:6} Proverbs 3:34} \bibleverse{7} Be subject
therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
\bibleverse{8} Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse
your hands, you sinners. Purify your hearts, you double-minded.
\bibleverse{9} Lament, mourn, and weep. Let your laughter be turned to
mourning and your joy to gloom. \bibleverse{10} Humble yourselves in the
sight of the Lord, and he will exalt you.

\bibleverse{11} Don't speak against one another, brothers. He who speaks
against a brother and judges his brother, speaks against the law and
judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law
but a judge. \bibleverse{12} Only one is the lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy. But who are you to judge another?

\bibleverse{13} Come now, you who say, ``Today or tomorrow let's go into
this city and spend a year there, trade, and make a profit.''
\bibleverse{14} Yet you don't know what your life will be like tomorrow.
For what is your life? For you are a vapour that appears for a little
time and then vanishes away. \bibleverse{15} For you ought to say, ``If
the Lord wills, we will both live, and do this or that.''
\bibleverse{16} But now you glory in your boasting. All such boasting is
evil. \bibleverse{17} To him therefore who knows to do good and doesn't
do it, to him it is sin.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Come now, you rich, weep and howl for your miseries that
are coming on you. \bibleverse{2} Your riches are corrupted and your
garments are moth-eaten. \bibleverse{3} Your gold and your silver are
corroded, and their corrosion will be for a testimony against you and
will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid up your treasure in the
last days. \bibleverse{4} Behold, the wages of the labourers who mowed
your fields, which you have kept back by fraud, cry out; and the cries
of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of
Armies.\footnote{\textbf{5:4} Greek: Sabaoth (for Hebrew: Tze'va'ot)}
\bibleverse{5} You have lived in luxury on the earth, and taken your
pleasure. You have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
\bibleverse{6} You have condemned and you have murdered the righteous
one. He doesn't resist you.

\bibleverse{7} Be patient therefore, brothers, until the coming of the
Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth,
being patient over it, until it receives the early and late rain.
\bibleverse{8} You also be patient. Establish your hearts, for the
coming of the Lord is at hand.

\bibleverse{9} Don't grumble, brothers, against one another, so that you
won't be judged. Behold, the judge stands at the door. \bibleverse{10}
Take, brothers, for an example of suffering and of perseverance, the
prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. \bibleverse{11} Behold, we
call them blessed who endured. You have heard of the perseverance of Job
and have seen the Lord in the outcome, and how the Lord is full of
compassion and mercy.

\bibleverse{12} But above all things, my brothers, don't swear--- not by
heaven, or by the earth, or by any other oath; but let your ``yes'' be
``yes'', and your ``no'', ``no'', so that you don't fall into
hypocrisy.\footnote{\textbf{5:12} TR reads ``under judgement'' instead
  of ``into hypocrisy''}

\bibleverse{13} Is any amongst you suffering? Let him pray. Is any
cheerful? Let him sing praises. \bibleverse{14} Is any amongst you sick?
Let him call for the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; \bibleverse{15} and the
prayer of faith will heal him who is sick, and the Lord will raise him
up. If he has committed sins, he will be forgiven. \bibleverse{16}
Confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, that you may
be healed. The insistent prayer of a righteous person is powerfully
effective. \bibleverse{17} Elijah was a man with a nature like ours, and
he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it didn't rain on the
earth for three years and six months. \bibleverse{18} He prayed again,
and the sky gave rain, and the earth produced its fruit.

\bibleverse{19} Brothers, if any amongst you wanders from the truth and
someone turns him back, \bibleverse{20} let him know that he who turns a
sinner from the error of his way will save a soul from death and will
cover a multitude of sins.
