\hypertarget{section}{%
\section{1}\label{section}}

\bibleverse{1} That which was from the beginning, that which we have
heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we saw, and our
hands touched, concerning the Word of life \bibleverse{2} (and the life
was revealed, and we have seen, and testify, and declare to you the
life, the eternal life, which was with the Father, and was revealed to
us); \bibleverse{3} that which we have seen and heard we declare to you,
that you also may have fellowship with us. Yes, and our fellowship is
with the Father and with his Son, Jesus Christ.\footnote{\textbf{1:3}
  ``Christ'' means ``Anointed One''.} \bibleverse{4} And we write these
things to you, that our joy may be fulfilled.

\bibleverse{5} This is the message which we have heard from him and
announce to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
\bibleverse{6} If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in
the darkness, we lie and don't tell the truth. \bibleverse{7} But if we
walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all
sin. \bibleverse{8} If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves,
and the truth is not in us. \bibleverse{9} If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and righteous to forgive us the sins and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. \bibleverse{10} If we say that we haven't sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

\hypertarget{section-1}{%
\section{2}\label{section-1}}

\bibleverse{1} My little children, I write these things to you so that
you may not sin. If anyone sins, we have a Counsellor\footnote{\textbf{2:1}
  Greek παρακλητον: Counsellor, Helper, Intercessor, Advocate, and
  Comforter.} with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous.
\bibleverse{2} And he is the atoning sacrifice\footnote{\textbf{2:2}
  ``atoning sacrifice'' is from the Greek ``ιλασμος'', an appeasing,
  propitiating, or the means of appeasement or propitiation---the
  sacrifice that turns away God's wrath because of our sin.} for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world.
\bibleverse{3} This is how we know that we know him: if we keep his
commandments. \bibleverse{4} One who says, ``I know him,'' and doesn't
keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth isn't in him.
\bibleverse{5} But God's love has most certainly been perfected in
whoever keeps his word. This is how we know that we are in him:
\bibleverse{6} he who says he remains in him ought himself also to walk
just like he walked.

\bibleverse{7} Brothers, I write no new commandment to you, but an old
commandment which you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the
word which you heard from the beginning. \bibleverse{8} Again, I write a
new commandment to you, which is true in him and in you, because the
darkness is passing away and the true light already shines.
\bibleverse{9} He who says he is in the light and hates his brother is
in the darkness even until now. \bibleverse{10} He who loves his brother
remains in the light, and there is no occasion for stumbling in him.
\bibleverse{11} But he who hates his brother is in the darkness, and
walks in the darkness, and doesn't know where he is going, because the
darkness has blinded his eyes.

\bibleverse{12} I write to you, little children, because your sins are
forgiven you for his name's sake.

\bibleverse{13} I write to you, fathers, because you know him who is
from the beginning.

I write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one.

I write to you, little children, because you know the Father.

\bibleverse{14} I have written to you, fathers, because you know him who
is from the beginning.

I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word
of God remains in you, and you have overcome the evil one.

\bibleverse{15} Don't love the world or the things that are in the
world. If anyone loves the world, the Father's love isn't in him.
\bibleverse{16} For all that is in the world---the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life---isn't the Father's, but is
the world's. \bibleverse{17} The world is passing away with its lusts,
but he who does God's will remains forever.

\bibleverse{18} Little children, these are the end times, and as you
heard that the Antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have
arisen. By this we know that it is the final hour. \bibleverse{19} They
went out from us, but they didn't belong to us; for if they had belonged
to us, they would have continued with us. But they left, that they might
be revealed that none of them belong to us. \bibleverse{20} You have an
anointing from the Holy One, and you all have knowledge.\footnote{\textbf{2:20}
  Or, ``know what is true'', or, ``know all things''} \bibleverse{21} I
have not written to you because you don't know the truth, but because
you know it, and because no lie is of the truth. \bibleverse{22} Who is
the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the
Antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son. \bibleverse{23}
Whoever denies the Son doesn't have the Father. He who confesses the Son
has the Father also.

\bibleverse{24} Therefore, as for you, let that remain in you which you
heard from the beginning. If that which you heard from the beginning
remains in you, you also will remain in the Son, and in the Father.
\bibleverse{25} This is the promise which he promised us, the eternal
life.

\bibleverse{26} These things I have written to you concerning those who
would lead you astray. \bibleverse{27} As for you, the anointing which
you received from him remains in you, and you don't need for anyone to
teach you. But as his anointing teaches you concerning all things, and
is true, and is no lie, and even as it taught you, you will remain in
him.

\bibleverse{28} Now, little children, remain in him, that when he
appears, we may have boldness and not be ashamed before him at his
coming. \bibleverse{29} If you know that he is righteous, you know that
everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him.

\hypertarget{section-2}{%
\section{3}\label{section-2}}

\bibleverse{1} See how great a love the Father has given to us, that we
should be called children of God! For this cause the world doesn't know
us, because it didn't know him. \bibleverse{2} Beloved, now we are
children of God. It is not yet revealed what we will be; but we know
that when he is revealed, we will be like him, for we will see him just
as he is. \bibleverse{3} Everyone who has this hope set on him purifies
himself, even as he is pure.

\bibleverse{4} Everyone who sins also commits lawlessness. Sin is
lawlessness. \bibleverse{5} You know that he was revealed to take away
our sins, and no sin is in him. \bibleverse{6} Whoever remains in him
doesn't sin. Whoever sins hasn't seen him and doesn't know him.

\bibleverse{7} Little children, let no one lead you astray. He who does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. \bibleverse{8} He
who sins is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the
beginning. To this end the Son of God was revealed: that he might
destroy the works of the devil. \bibleverse{9} Whoever is born of God
doesn't commit sin, because his seed remains in him, and he can't sin,
because he is born of God. \bibleverse{10} In this the children of God
are revealed, and the children of the devil. Whoever doesn't do
righteousness is not of God, neither is he who doesn't love his brother.
\bibleverse{11} For this is the message which you heard from the
beginning, that we should love one another--- \bibleverse{12} unlike
Cain, who was of the evil one and killed his brother. Why did he kill
him? Because his deeds were evil, and his brother's righteous.

\bibleverse{13} Don't be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you.
\bibleverse{14} We know that we have passed out of death into life,
because we love the brothers. He who doesn't love his brother remains in
death. \bibleverse{15} Whoever hates his brother is a murderer, and you
know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.

\bibleverse{16} By this we know love, because he laid down his life for
us. And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers. \bibleverse{17}
But whoever has the world's goods and sees his brother in need, then
closes his heart of compassion against him, how does God's love remain
in him?

\bibleverse{18} My little children, let's not love in word only, or with
the tongue only, but in deed and truth. \bibleverse{19} And by this we
know that we are of the truth and persuade our hearts before him,
\bibleverse{20} because if our heart condemns us, God is greater than
our heart, and knows all things. \bibleverse{21} Beloved, if our hearts
don't condemn us, we have boldness towards God; \bibleverse{22} so
whatever we ask, we receive from him, because we keep his commandments
and do the things that are pleasing in his sight. \bibleverse{23} This
is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son, Jesus
Christ, and love one another, even as he commanded. \bibleverse{24} He
who keeps his commandments remains in him, and he in him. By this we
know that he remains in us, by the Spirit which he gave us.

\hypertarget{section-3}{%
\section{4}\label{section-3}}

\bibleverse{1} Beloved, don't believe every spirit, but test the
spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone
out into the world. \bibleverse{2} By this you know the Spirit of God:
every spirit who confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of
God, \bibleverse{3} and every spirit who doesn't confess that Jesus
Christ has come in the flesh is not of God; and this is the spirit of
the Antichrist, of whom you have heard that it comes. Now it is in the
world already. \bibleverse{4} You are of God, little children, and have
overcome them, because greater is he who is in you than he who is in the
world. \bibleverse{5} They are of the world. Therefore they speak of the
world, and the world hears them. \bibleverse{6} We are of God. He who
knows God listens to us. He who is not of God doesn't listen to us. By
this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

\bibleverse{7} Beloved, let's love one another, for love is of God; and
everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. \bibleverse{8} He
who doesn't love doesn't know God, for God is love. \bibleverse{9} By
this God's love was revealed in us, that God has sent his only
born\footnote{\textbf{4:9} The phrase ``only born'' is from the Greek
  word ``μονογενη'', which is sometimes translated ``only begotten'' or
  ``one and only''.} Son into the world that we might live through him.
\bibleverse{10} In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son as the atoning sacrifice\footnote{\textbf{4:10}
  ``atoning sacrifice'' is from the Greek ``ιλασμος'', an appeasing,
  propitiating, or the means of appeasement or propitiation---the
  sacrifice that turns away God's wrath because of our sin.} for our
sins. \bibleverse{11} Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we also
ought to love one another. \bibleverse{12} No one has seen God at any
time. If we love one another, God remains in us, and his love has been
perfected in us.

\bibleverse{13} By this we know that we remain in him and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit. \bibleverse{14} We have seen and
testify that the Father has sent the Son as the Saviour of the world.
\bibleverse{15} Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God
remains in him, and he in God. \bibleverse{16} We know and have believed
the love which God has for us. God is love, and he who remains in love
remains in God, and God remains in him. \bibleverse{17} In this, love
has been made perfect amongst us, that we may have boldness in the day
of judgement, because as he is, even so we are in this world.
\bibleverse{18} There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out
fear, because fear has punishment. He who fears is not made perfect in
love. \bibleverse{19} We love him,\footnote{\textbf{4:19} NU omits
  ``him''.} because he first loved us. \bibleverse{20} If a man says,
``I love God,'' and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who doesn't
love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? \bibleverse{21} This commandment we have from him, that he who
loves God should also love his brother.

\hypertarget{section-4}{%
\section{5}\label{section-4}}

\bibleverse{1} Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born
of God. Whoever loves the Father also loves the child who is born of
him. \bibleverse{2} By this we know that we love the children of God,
when we love God and keep his commandments. \bibleverse{3} For this is
loving God, that we keep his commandments. His commandments are not
grievous. \bibleverse{4} For whatever is born of God overcomes the
world. This is the victory that has overcome the world: your faith.
\bibleverse{5} Who is he who overcomes the world, but he who believes
that Jesus is the Son of God?

\bibleverse{6} This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not
with the water only, but with the water and the blood. It is the Spirit
who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth. \bibleverse{7} For there
are three who testify:\footnote{\textbf{5:7} Only a few recent
  manuscripts add ``in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy
  Spirit; and these three are one. And there are three that testify on
  earth:''} \bibleverse{8} the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and the
three agree as one. \bibleverse{9} If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater; for this is God's testimony which he has
testified concerning his Son. \bibleverse{10} He who believes in the Son
of God has the testimony in himself. He who doesn't believe God has made
him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has
given concerning his Son. \bibleverse{11} The testimony is this: that
God gave to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
\bibleverse{12} He who has the Son has the life. He who doesn't have
God's Son doesn't have the life.

\bibleverse{13} These things I have written to you who believe in the
name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life,
and that you may continue to believe in the name of the Son of God.

\bibleverse{14} This is the boldness which we have towards him, that if
we ask anything according to his will, he listens to us. \bibleverse{15}
And if we know that he listens to us, whatever we ask, we know that we
have the petitions which we have asked of him.

\bibleverse{16} If anyone sees his brother sinning a sin not leading to
death, he shall ask, and God will give him life for those who sin not
leading to death. There is sin leading to death. I don't say that he
should make a request concerning this. \bibleverse{17} All
unrighteousness is sin, and there is sin not leading to death.

\bibleverse{18} We know that whoever is born of God doesn't sin, but he
who was born of God keeps himself, and the evil one doesn't touch him.
\bibleverse{19} We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in
the power of the evil one. \bibleverse{20} We know that the Son of God
has come and has given us an understanding, that we know him who is
true; and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is
the true God and eternal life.

\bibleverse{21} Little children, keep yourselves from idols.
